CZECHOSLOVAK POWER STRUGGLE INTENSIFIES
The confrontation between
reformers led by new party boss
Alexander Dubcek and conservatives
headed by his ousted predecessor,
Antonin Novotny, could get out of
hand. The power struggle is no
longer a purely intraparty affair
because large segments of the population have become embroiled.
Dubcek's widely welcomed
"action program" calls for a sharp
reduction in the party's role and
for the "widest possible democratization of the entire sociopolitical system." Conservatives
fear this goes too far, and have
countered with an attack on the
program's weakest point, its commitment to vigorous implementation
of the lagging economic reform.
They have been playing on fears
that reform will mean loss of
jobs, rising prices, and a drop
in the standard of living, and
are trying to sow distrust between workers and "radical intellectual reformers," by implication
including Dubcek.
Dubcek has rallied considerable support. Associations of
writers, journalists, and farmers
have pledged their aid. The
chairman of the parliament and
the key party boss of the city of
Prague have deserted Novotny.
Dubcek can probably count on party
support in Slovakia and Moravia,
but Bohemia is in doubt. He has
taken steps to control the armed
forces and the secret police. He
has also recently relaxed censorship to a significant extent, a
step that could aid his supporters. Novotny's strength lies
among ideological conservatives,
industrial workers, and the bureaucracy.
The struggle could come to a
head in mid-March when the central
committee meets to decide on the
action program. Because Novotny
and Dubcek have been appealing
for and receiving support from
extremist wings in the regime,
they may lose control of the situation, and face the risk of domestic disorders.
Soviet and East European
leaders who came to Prague last
week for the 20th anniversary of
the Communist take-over were unmistakably reserved. Although
they pretended nothing was amiss,
they would seem to have cause for
concern. The potential implications for internal developments
in their own countries probably
were foremost in their thoughts,
particularly among the Poles,
who are trying to squelch already
emboldened intellectuals. The
Poles, as well as the East Germans, are also fearful of the
impact of Czechoslovak developments on Prague's relations with
West Germany.
The visiting Communist leaders appeared to avoid involvement
in the intraparty struggle. Few
of them mentioned Dubcek by name
and none of them alluded to the
action program. Brezhnev left as
soon as he decently could, not
even staying to hear Novotny's
speech. Neither he nor the
others responded to Dubcek's
public assurance that this "period of struggle" would become
"surrounded by glory" in future
years. (4.01W.-14NMWILEKb)
Page 18 WEEKLY SUMMARY 1 Mar 68
Approved for Release by CIA
Date AtAGUST 2",
9 Mar 68
Approved For Release
5
2002/08/20: CIA-R0P79T00975A010900 060001-4 25X1
Approved For Rel se 2002/08/20: CIA-RDP79T00975A0 10900A541-4
25X1
Czechoslovakia: The Dubcek regime may soon
begin to give a more nationalist turn to the country's
foreign policy.
'previously
expected that the government would wait about a year
before striking out on new foreign policy paths, now believe that it will embark on a more flexible course in
the next few months. The regime's preoccupation with
domestic problems, however, and its dependence on
the USSR for raw materials, markets, and defense will
limit its foreign options.
Certain small shifts in Czechoslovakia's attitudes
toward its Communist neighbors and the West already
have become evident. For example, the failure of the
Czechoslovak delegation at the recent conference of
Communist parties in Budapest fully to endorse the
Soviet position was,	a
studied effort to preserve room for future maneuver.
25X1 	lonly the strong urgings of the
Poles, East Germans, and Russians brought the
Czechoslovaks to support the Russian call for an international Communist meeting later this year.
In a recent example of thawing toward the West,
the Czechoslovaks have made known that they now regard cooperation with such bodies as the UN Economic
Commission for Europe as essential. They believe,
however, that they cannot afford politically to move too
rapidly toward better relatiions with individual Western
states, especially the US.
25X1
25X1
Approved For Rel pase 2003/01/29 : CIA-RDP79T00975 4010900120001-7
25X1
Czechoslovakia: The liberals around party leader
Dubcek are well on the way toward sweeping conservatives out of the central leadership.
According to the Yugoslav news agency Tanjug,
President Novotny's resignation may be expected at
any hour. Quoting "well informed sources," the agency
maintains that only the form in which the resignation
is to be tendered remains to be resolved.
One of the candidates recently often mentioned as
a replacement for Novotny is Josef Smrkovsky, party
central committee member and government minister,
who in the early 1950s was sentenced to life imprisonment for political crimes.
The faltering President has already signed an order
removing from office two of his staunchest supporters,
Minister of Interior Josef Kudrna and Prosecutor
General Jan Bartuska. Novotny's action came after
the presidium of the National Assembly had voiced its
lack of confidence in the two and suggests that his grasp
on political power has significantly weakened.
Other key Novotny supporters who have resigned
in the past few days include the premier of Slovakia and
the chief of the central council of trade unions. Two
other secretaries of the trade unions council also resigned and four more are under fire.
Defense Minister Lomshy, nother Novotny man,
is under heavy fire, and his resignation could come at
any time. Presumably it has been held up by the desire
of the party leaders to assess I.omsky's role, if any,
in the suicide of Deputy Defense Minister Vladimir
Janko and the defection of Major General Jan Sejna.
Lomsky also appears to have Russian support.
Dubcek and the liberals are confronted, however,
with conservative opponents who still have seats on the
16 Mar 68	3
Approved For Release 2003/01/29 : CIA-RDP791 -00975 010900120001-7 25X1
010900120001-7
25X1
Approved For Release 2003101/29: CIA-RDP79T00975A
25X1
party presidium and in the central committee, even
though some of them may have been ousted from their
government jobs. After a session of the party presidium
on 14-15 March, the liberals apparently forced through
a decision against postponing a central committee meeting until next month. This meeting is to decide on personnel changes and the party "action program."
The liberals are increasing their hold on the powerful party central committee apparatus. During its
marathon meeting, the presidium decided to turn over
responsibility in the central committee for education,
science, and culture to Gestimir Cisar, an outspoken
liberal who for years defended the interests of intellectuals in the party and government.
16 Mar 68	4
Approved For Release-2003#04429-:-GIA-RDP-79T-0097-54010900120001-7 25X1
-TOP—SECRET
EO 12958 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs
Czechoslovakia: Party boss Dubcek has for the
first time unequivocally associated himself with sweeping changes in Czechoslovakia.
In a major speech on 16 March, he endorsed the
"democratization" process which had been set in motion after his election in January. He also implied that
there are practical limits on how far this process will
be allowed to proceed. He indicated, for example, that
while the political system must remain Communist, it
also must be responsive to the will of the people. He
said that particular interest groups-- such as students
and farmers—must have an influential voice in decision
making.
He unambiguously emphasized that Czechoslovakia
will stand "firmly and unshakeably" loyal to its Communist allies and will work for international Communist
unity. At the same time, however, he said that his regime will work to restore traditional relationships with
the rest of the world as long as they do not conflict
with its basic alliances.
Dubcek's speech identified him with far-reaching
decisions made on 14-15 March by the party's presidium.
These decisions go a long way toward meeting the expectations of the rank-and-file party members and the
population. Detailed information on the party central
committee meetings that led to the ouster of former party
boss Novotny will be made available to every party member. Personnel changes will be proposed at the central
committee session in late March to make it possible for
the party and government to "successfully realize and
pursue the new policy." The National Assembly was
urged to adopt a new election law, presumably one which
would be more democratic than the single slate provided
by the present law.
(continued)
18 Mar 68	3
TOP SECRET
Approved for Release by CIA
Date Atiausr 2 oo,
The presidium accepted the assurances of the
armed forces and police that they will faithfully serve
the country in the spirit of the law, thus implying a
retreat from past use of arbitrary power. The commission investigating the defection of Major General
Sejna was charged with "drawing conclusions regardless of anyone," meaning that top party and government
leaders, including President Novotny, probably will be
Implicated, The presidium responded to demands for
the "rehabilitation" and compensation of some 40,000
people who had been unjustly treated in Stalinist times.
The foreign policy stance it adopted was similar to the
one elaborated by Dubcek and should be acceptable to
Moscow.
At the same time that these developments were
taking place in Prague, the Russians seemed to be
making some contingency plans of their own.
 1There is
no evidence at this time, however, that the Soviets
are moving any troops or that Moscow expects the
Czechoslovak situation to deteriorate to an extent that
would raise the question of intervention.
18 Mar 68 4
TOP SECRETr-
COMMUNIST REACTION TO EVENTS IN POLAND AND CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Fear of contamination is
apparent in Eastern European
and Russian reaction to recent
events in Poland and Czechoslovakia.
The Bulgarians have shown
unusual sensitivity, waiting
eight days before reporting on
the Polish student demonstrations and giving only the sketchiest treatment to Czechoslovak
events. Elsewhere in Eastern
Europe, the commentary has been
"factual or hostile, with Yugoslavia reporting fairly objectively, more so than Rumania
or Albania. In Poland, Gomulka
is disturbed enough to charge
that the Czechoslovak developments are the work of "imperialist reaction and other enemies
of socialism," an analysis that
will not be welcome in Prague.
In East Germany, it is evident that the regime fears for
its internal stability and for
its position in the bloc. Public East German commentary on
Czechoslovak developments has
been selective, tendentious,
and misleading, As for the Polish
demonstrations, they are said to
have been caused by "antisocialist
troublemakers" led by "Zionists
and West German agents."
Moscow continues to withhold all information on the
Polish student demonstrations
from the public, and to describe
the political changes in Czechoslovakia in the blandest terms.
The regime is showing some signs
of concern, however, that Western
radiobroadcasts are getting
through to the Soviet population
with the true story of Eastern
European developments. A Pravda
editorial on 14 March calling
for more than "passive loyalty"
could lay the groundwork for
more direct criticism of Polish
and Czech events. It may also
herald a further crackdown on
intellectual dissidents in the
USSR, and there are unconfirmed
reports of Soviet efforts to
limit gatherings of university
students in Moscow and to intensify police surveillance of
student activity in general.
SECRET
Page 14 WEEKLY SUMMARY , 22 Mar 68
•
SECRET
There has been no evidence
of Russian or Eastern European
military activity that can be
directly related to the political
unrest in Poland and Czechoslovakia. Normal seasonal training
is being conducted, however, with
the tempo expected to increase
during the next four weeks as the
end of the winter cycle approaches.
Various sources have reported
that a Warsaw Pact exercise involving Soviet, Rumanian, Bulgarian, Czech, and Hungarian forces
would be held in eastern Bulgaria
from 22 to 27 March. Plans have
been canceled, however, for a
large-scale military exercise in
March in Czechoslovakia--possibly
a pact exercise. The cancellation was revealed on 20 March by
the Czechoslovak deputy chief of
staff, who said this was being
done for the sake of calm and that
only small units would be in the
field.
In view of the recent events
in Poland and Czechoslavakia, as
well as the Sena defection, a
meeting of Soviet and Eastern
European representatives could
be called soon to discuss and
review various aspects of European
security policy and the German
problem. Rumania might absent
itself from such a meeting, however, because its views on these
issues would be at considerable
variance with those of its nominal
allies.
Although the implications of
the absence of a Rumanian delegation would not be lost on those
present, Bucharest's nonattendance might also be welcomed.
Unified policies and viewpoints,
for example, are of paramount importance to the East German regime
in terms of its stability. Moreover, in striving for a consensus
at such a meeting, the members
could exert an indirect, but
nevertheless effective, pressure
on the Czechoslovaks, forcing
them to acknowledge--at least
for the time being--that their
fortunes would best be served by
loyalty to the USSR and the Eastern European allies. (SECRET)
Page 15 WEEKLY SUMMARY	22 Mar 68
DUBCEK WINNING POLITICAL STRUGGLE IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA
The liberals around Czechoslovak leader Dubcek are well on
their way toward sweeping conservatives out of the party leadership.
President Novotny's ouster
appears imminent. The Presidium
of the National Assembly on 21
March unanimously voted for his
resignation. One of the candidates most frequently mentioned
as a replacement is Josef Smrkovsky, party central committee member and government minister, who
in the early 1950s was sentenced
to life imprisonment for political crimes.
During the past week, several
Novotny supporters in the regime
hierarchy have been ousted or have
resigned. Countless others are
under fire, especially at the, district and local levels.
Dubcek made his first major
speech in nearly a month on
16 March. He used the occasion
to associate himself unequivocally
with plans for vast changes in
Czechoslovakia, and made absolutely
clear that he fully supported the
"democratization" process that has
been set in motion. He also implied, however, that there are
practical limits on how far this
process will be allowed to proceed.
He indicated, for example, that
while the political system should
be responsive to the people and
allow particular interest groups,
such as students and farmers, to
have an influential voice in decision making, it must also remain
Communist.
Dubcek unambiguously reaffirmed
that Czechoslovakia will stand loyal
to its Communist allies and will
work for international Communist
unity. At the same time, however,
he said that his regime would seek
to restore traditional relationships with the rest of the world
as long as they do not conflict
with its basic alliances. He did
not exclude West Germany.
Dubcek reportedly wishes to
review and probably change Czechoslovak policies toward the Middle East and North Africa. He
especially hopes to reduce costly
aid programs for Egypt, Syria, and
Algeria, and also wants to improve
relations with the US.
More and more elements of
the party and the population are
openly expressing their support
for Dubcek. The prevailing mood
is one of pride in . "democratization" and pleased surprise that
it has gone so quickly and so
well. Many people are optimistic
about the future and see no possibility of a return to the "old
days." There is some worry about
Page 13
-S-EeitETWEEKLY SUMMARY 22 Mar 68
ApprovedforReleasebyCIA
gate, A 4.4 au ST- 2004
ork	
ET
moving too far, too fast, however, and some people hope that
the unveiling of the party "action program" at a central committee plenum on 28 March will
serve as a stabilizing factor.
Drafting of the economic
portion of the "action prograe
is being stepped up to allow for
its consideration at the forthcoming central committee meeting. Few details are available,
and apparently it will deal only
with the most pressing problems.
This may mean that complete agreement has not yet been reached on
how to expedite the economic reform. Dubcek has promised, however, that whatever happens,
living standards will not be sacrificed in order to solve the
nation's economic problems.
(4.101WINHOININALli
SECRET
Page 14 WEEKLY SUMMARY , 22 Mar 68

