Approved For Re - A025300110001-8 25X1
(EGYPT: President Sadat's address to the nation
last night was primarily a fence-mending effort designed to mollify and undercut domestic and foreign--
primarily Soviet--opponents of his recent policy innovations. At the same time, he made no apologies
for those policies and made it clear that he will
pursue them. Although generally circumspect toward
the US, Sadat made some uncharacteristically benevolent statements, reflecting a guarded optimism that
Washington intends some action to break the Middle
East impasse.
The most dramatic portion of the speech, made
on the anniversary of President Nasir's death, came
at its conclusion when Sadat announced an amnesty
for a group of students arrested during demonstrations early this year, as well as the reinstatement
of a large number of journalists purged for their
leftist views. The conciliatory gestures are designed to head off the possibility of further student disturbances when the school year opens next
month, to answer legitimate student grievances, and
to give substance to Sadat's moves toward social
liberalization.
On the subject of his domestic and foreign
policy reforms, Sadat, in essence, invoked the
memory of Nasir to support his program of change
away from Nasirism and socialism. Noting that one
of Nasirism's most important characteristics is
"its ability to respond to constant movement," Sadat
explained his own policy of "evolution" as both
based on his predecessor's movement and unique in
itself. Although intending to ease the misgivings
of remaining Nasir devotees, Sadat could not resist
the temptation to emphasize the greater merit of
his own program over Nasir's; his government has
proved, he said, "that the man came from the nation,
and not the nation from the man."
(continued)
29 Sep 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 1
25X1
Approved For Release 2004/01/05: CIA-RDP79T00975A025300110001-8
Approved For Release 2004/01/05: CIA-RDP79T00975A0 300110001-8 25X1
C Although Sadat derided the US for supporting
Israel and echoed his usual rejection of an interim
agreement to reopen the Suez Canal and institute
a partial Israeli withdrawal, he expressed pleased
surprise at Secretary of State Kissinger's meeting
on 25 September with Arab representatives at the UN.
Sadat noted that Egypt has already made its position
clear to the US, but he did not use the occasion to
spell out the controversial specifics of that position. Sadat remains skeptical of US intentions,
but his approach reflects a sense of expectation
toward possible US moves on the Arab-Israeli conflict
and a desire to avoid dampening prospects for movement. He made a point of noting at the end of his
speech that he had deliberately avoided rhetoric on
"the battle."
Sadat took a balanced approach toward Egypt's
delicate relations with the USSR. Without ever
mentioning the Soviets directly, he explained policy
changes that have been disturbing Moscow in terms
intended to ease Soviet misgivings, but he did not
give any indication that he plans to alter his new
moves away from socialism. Sadat is not a friend
of the Soviets, but he wants to maintain good relations with them, and he has been at pains, since
initiating his policy realignment in July, to portray the Soviets as political allies.
This relaxed attitude has met with a testy
Soviet reaction. Moscow is apprehensive at the implication of adat's moves for its interests in
the area, 25X1
25X1
25X1
25X1
29 Sep 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin
25X1
Approved For Release 2004/01/05: CIA-RDP79T00975A025300110001-8
.UNikA$8148D
- . U0
Central Intelligence Bulletin
CONTENTS
ARAD STATES' ISRAEL: Israeli offensive regains
some territory. (Page 1)
CAMBODIA: Mandato of the High Political Council
xt ended -indefinitely. (Page 4)
JAPAN: Japanese. Export-Import Bank to increase
landing . (Page 5)
TAIWAN: Foreign investments rise. (Page 6)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: AUG 2007
FOR THE CORD: (Page 7),
UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED
ARAB STAT''ES - ISRAEL: After three days of heavy
fighting, Israsl has regained most of the territory
it lost to Syria in the Golan Heights, and has contained Egyptian forces to a narrow area along the
east bank of the Suez Canal. No otler Arab states
have become significantly involved in the fighting.
Syrian forces dealt heavy blows to Israeli outposts in the Golan Heights after fighting broke out
in the early afternoon of 6 October. Syria breached
Israeli lines at two points, captured the town of
Qunaytirah, and for a time held considerable territory in the 6entral sector.. By early this morning,
Israeli forces had recaptured almost all territory
up to the previous cease-fire lines, and--according
to Israeli accounts--had surrounded some Syrian units.
Losses have been substantial on both sides. The Israelis have admitted losing at least 35 aircraft and
150 tanks. in the Golan battle alone. Syrian tank
losses are placed at 300 by the Israelis, who claim
to have destroyed 37 Syrian aircraft in yesterday's
fighting.
On the Sinai front, fighting was initially less
intense. The Israelis apparently were satisfied to
contain the Egyptian thrust while dealing with the
more pressing situation on the Golan Heights. The
Egyptians. succeeded in putting as many as 11 bridges
across the canal, some of which were still in use
early this morning. As many as five Egyptian infantry divisions and 600-700 tanks have moved into the
Sinai, according to Israeli accounts. The Israelis
now claim to have hemmed in this force, but acknowledge that removing it will be a formidable task.
Contrary to their public statements, the Egyptians
have not made a concerted effort to strike into the
Sinai, suggesting that their strategy may be to take
and hold a relatively small area with a view to its
political rather than military 'advantages .
King Husayn of Jordan continues to resist the
pressures of other Arab leaders, ranging from Libya's President Qadhafi to Saudi Arabia's King Faysal, t enter the battle.
9 Oct 73 central InteZUgence Butlk 1
U T
I UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED
Few Arab states have contributed meaningful
assistance to Syria or Egypt, although most have
placed thoir military forces' on alert and: applauded
initial 'Syrian and Egyptian successes. Sudan, Morocco, Tunisia, Kuwait, and zraq have sent or promised to send soldiers to the front, but these troops
will not make an irmpact on the military .situation.
Some fedayeen forces have been active in southern
Lebanon, but these have been more an irritant than
a threat to Israel. Zgebanon has provided token humanitariai assistance to Egypt, but its modest army is concentrated around Beirut and is deployed in
Such a way as to guard against fedayeen-inspired
domestic trouble rather than an Israeli attack.
The -Soviet Union has -given political support to
the Arab cause, but has not made any moves to suggest
it intends to become involved in the military action.
In remarks yesterday, party chief Brezhnev placed the
blame for the fighting on Israel, but offered only
"sympathy" for the Arabs and reiterated Soviet support for a political settlement.. Soviet officials
have stressed that the present situation must not
jeopardize the general .improvement in US-soviet relations. .
The bulk of the Soviet Mediterranean squadron
has been grouped near Crete--well away from the combat area--and.has not been reinforced from the Black
Sea Xle.et. . Moscow has made flights to
Egypt and Syria since 4 Octtr
these flig -wed.Ja. oe
v naval shinps--evacuated dependents of Soviet
personnel as well as some civilian and military
technicians.
(continued)
9 Oct 73 Central ntalugence Ilulkdie 2
UNCLASSIFIED
UNCLASSIFIED
ET
. Egypt and Syria have been restrained in their
press treatment of the US, reflecting primarily official pride in the performance of their forces
during the first days of fighting. All Arab capital
havo been reported calm, with no serious anti-US
demonstrations. None of- the oil-producing states
have threatened to cut off the flow of oil to the
West, although Iraq on 6 October nationalized the
Exxon and Mobil shares of the Basra Petroleum Company.
Yesterday's Security Council meeting requested
by the US adjourned until today without taking any
decision. on the US proposal for a cease-fire, accompanied by a return to the 1967 cease-fire line.
Soviet delegate Malik Call d for a clear-cut staten a neaps to
occup ed' terr tories. C na
t a emat ims o *A;%J4-h "su er owers."
e taig a ar zi0 on their possible acceptance
of a cease-fire, maintaining that any settlement
must leave their respective states in control of the
dis uted '"occupied territories."
9 Oot 73 Cenro Isaa01 mog wBueticn 3
UNCLASSIFIED
EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
EO 13526 3.3(b)(6)>25Yrs
EO 13526 3.5(c)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOD DATE: 29-Aug-2012
CARAB STATES ISRAEL: Israeli forces encountered
stiff resistance yesterday on the .Golan Heights, but
advanced past the 1967 cease-fire line. Fighting on
the Egyptian front was more sporadic with neither
side committing enough manpower to seriously challenge
the other's position.
Israeli ground forces pushed about 11 kilometers
beyond the 1967 cease-fire line, along a narrow front
between Mount Hermon and Qunaytirah in the northern
Golan Heights, yesterday afternoon,. _
the likely Israeli target in Syria will be Qatana,
about 20 kilometers
southwest o Damascus. Israeli aircraft continued
to pound Syrian positions last night and this morning,
especially on the flanks of the most advanced Israeli
units. Israeli aircraft attacked Damascus international airport and seven other nearby Syrian airfields
yesterday. Five Israeli planes were lost as a result
of ground fire--probably SA-6 missiles. Syria reported Israeli naval units and helicopters attacked
the port of Tartus shortly before midnight last night.
Damascus claimed to have destroyed three Israeli boats
and a helicopter in this engagement. A Soviet merchant vessel was struck by two missiles, but no casualties were reported.
The situation in the Sinai remains relatively
unchanged. The Egyptians have not made a serious attempt to expand their positions on the east bank of
the canal nor have they launched a major drive eastward toward the Sinai passes. The Israeli Air Force
continues to attack Egyptian positions along the
canal; .over 120 sorties were flown yesterday and
several aircraft were lost to round fire. Only a
few Egyptian fighters were flying--none
were seen over the east ban . small Egyptian
thrust to move away from the canal was made south
of Suez City, but apparently was turned back by the
Israelis.
(continued)
12 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 1
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
- - Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOD DATE: 29-Aug-2012
Beir
f/ Zahlahe
Mediterranean
Sea
Lebanon
Sidon
O Damascus
00Qatana,
arl r<
Tyr IsraOi
Harfa air strikes
llyas
/ penetration
Al Qunaytirah
-4OLAN 1967 Cease-Fire
Line
HEIGHTS.
Akko
I SAsh Shaykh
TiberiasMiskin
STas
3 ~ Naarth
Dar'a
Jordan
WEST ANK b IMafraq
f a a 1A 20
554689 10-73 CIA
TOP for-Re
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOO DATE: 29-Aug-2012 -
32 3 _ Tel Aviv-Yaf -
Mediterranean Sea ISRAEL
Bea - -
Gaza -
Port
Alexandria
.- Masra AI &~rai- f
Qantarah u - ;
\I|smailia r r
- -P *620 -metp - B r fjefaf
30 CAIRO Suez -
.. EG PT .. /; -
-- Al Fayyum*
Ras Zafaranah //' / -/
/ \/ -/ //
uzRas 
hari'
- -23 ~Al Minya *S 8
Shaft of i- Ttran
.4 LiD Red
*ttrghada Sea -- - 320 34
55 I
Too -REle
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
- - Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOO DATE: 29-Aug-2012
Moscow is keeping in close diplomatic touch with
the Arab states and probably is 'receiving pressure
for additional assistance. Soviet Foreign Minister
Gromyko met with several Arab ambassadors in'Moscow
yesterday and accepted their thanks for Soviet support.
Gromyko told the envoys that the USSR "will exert all
efforts" on behalf of a Middle East peace that safeguards the security of all countries in the region.
The Iraqi Foreign Minister was in Moscow on 9-10 October. He said the visit was for consultations on
"important joint matters" in accordance with the
Iraqi-Soviet friendship treaty. The discussions probably centered on Soviet logistic support for the
Iraqi war effort.
The deployment of Arab troops from countries other
than Syria and Egypt appears to be increasing.. Some
countries such as Kuwait and the Sudan have announced
token contributions, but as many as 16,000 Iraqi troops
and more than 100 tanks were reported to have crossed
into' Syria yesterday. These numbers cannot be confirmed but it is apparent that Baghdad is becoming
increasingly involved in the fighting. Iraqi Armed
Forces Headquarters announced yesterday that Iraqi
planes and tanks have joined other Arab forces on the
battlefront. The statement also admits the loss of
12 planes and lists the names of Iraqi pilots killed
in action.
A Saudi brigade was reported moving into Jordan
last night. It will augment the Saudi brigade already
12 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 2
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOO DATE: 29-Aug-2012
' TOP SERET
stationed in southern Jordan. King Hassan has announced that a contin ent of Moroccan troops is en
route t Egypt.
Morocco already had 2,000-3,000
troops in Syria before the outbreak of hostilities.
According to a Moroccan Foreign Ministry spokesman,
this contingent has taken heavy casualties on the Golan
Heights. The willingness of other Arab states to make
these sacrifices will place increased pressure on
Jordan's King Husayn to take a more active role in
the hostilities.
Lebanon, however, continues to show no interest
in getting involved in the fighting. In a statement
to the press today, the Defense Minister stressed
Lebanon's defensive posture. He avoided any suggestion that the Lebanese might initiate a diversionary
action against Israel, but emphasized that the army
is ready to "frustrate any aggression." With regard
to Lebanon's relations with the Palestinian guerrillas,
the Defense Minister asserted that fedayeen leaders
had shown "understanding" toward the government, an
apparent allusion to the limited involvement in the
war of Lebanon-based guerrillas. Some of the fedayeen have engaged in minor cross-border operations
into Israel.
Although pleasantly surprised about Egyptian
military success, Yasir Arafat and some fedayeen
leaders are less happy about the possible political
imalictions of the war,
Arafat is said to fear that a likely outcome
o thefighting-in which the fedayeen role has been
minimal--will be the eclipse of Fatah and the PFLP.
Arafat is also critical of what he believes to be
Sadat's strategy, that is, that Cairo will be content
to occupy only a limited amount of territory in the
Sinai.while anticipating great power intervention.
Arafat hopes to crank up the fedayeen propaganda
machine to urge the Arab states not to accept a ceasefire and to fight a war of "total liberation."
(continued)
12 Oct. 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 3
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOQ DATE: 29-Aug-2012 .
The UN Security Council convened last night.
after a two-day recess, but the proceedings were
largely confined to Egyptian and Israeli charges as
to which side initiated hostilities. In their statements, Foreign Ministers Eban and Zayyat went no
further than to agree to "study" an appeal to end the
fighting made by secretary- General Waldheim.
12 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOQ DATE: 29-Aug-2012
FOR THE RECORD*
USSR: Soviet satellite reconnaissance of the
Middle East has increased since early October. Two
high resolution photoreconnaissance satellites currently are in orbit. One of these, Cosmos 597, which
is in an orbit that will provide optimum coverage of
the Middle East, may be brought down this morning
after only six days. Cosmos 596, a low resolution
photoreconnaissance satellite, was brought down early
on 9 October after completing one half of the normal
12-day mission. Similarly, Soviet Elint satellite
monitoring of the Middle East has been at a high
level since 4 October.
*This item was prepared by CIA without consultation
with the Departments of State and Defense.
12 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 15
RET
T
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
EO 13526 3.3(b)(1)>25Yrs Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
EO 13526 3.3(b)(6)>25Yrs
EO 13526 3.5(c)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 29-Aug-2012
- ARAB 'STATES ISRAEL: The Israelis are making hard-won advances in the Golan Heights and in their
efforts to penetrate into Syria. There is little
action in the Sinai.
Heavy fighting on the Golan Heights died- down
last night with Israeli forces about 12 miles beyond
the cease-fire line, but unable to achieve.a decisive
breakthrough on the road to Damascus. In the southern sector of the Heights, the Syrians claim to have
made advances, and may have overrun a UN observation
post early yesterday. The area was relatively quiet later in the day, however, with indications that the
Israelis may have retaken the post and were slightly
beyond the cease-fire line. The Syrians are reportedly withdrawing tank units from the front and deploying them to a second defense line nearer Damascus.
For the first time, Damascus has acknowledged publicly that Israeli troops have made progress on the
"war's northern front." In air activity, the Israelis
made over 400 sorties yesterday, making it the heaviest day of the war. Despite this intense activity
and their own heavy losses in dogfights, the Syrians
continued throughout most of the day to fly ground=
support.missions.
Activity on the Sinai front yesterday was limited to artillery exchanges and a reduced number of
Israeli air strikes. Neither side claimed significant advances, and neither suffered serious losses.
Early yesterday the Israelis charged that the Egyptians had moved four SAM batteries to the east side
of the canal, but today they reported that
they had determined
that the resumed SAMs were dummies.
the Egyptians mounted helicopter assaults at three points on the Sinai coast, including
Abu Rudesis, where a limited number of Egyptian troops
and a helicopter pilot were captured. |
Soviet experts have reviewed
three areas--Port Said, Ismailia, and Dumyat--to decide on the positioning of surface-to-surface mis- i
siles.
(continued)
13 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 1
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOO DATE: 29-Aug-2012
Le non * a
Al Ou irah % advance
/ LAN -- Armistice line, 1949 IGHTS haykh
--- Surfaced road Half y r i a
0 25 50 Statute Miles " ayda
0 25 50 Kiloneters
-A lMafraq '
Tel Aviv E ' I J\
Mediterranean Sea Y*O>)I T .
- ebro Sea
ort SoldJO dan
Suez l f
Isma -lia EanaI l
r Jifjefah
A( Pd ass a \
Su NN a ass
SINAI
PENINSULA 
El t
Saud.
A A abi
* Red Sea
554696 10-73 CIA
E-P sEKE-PtET~
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOO DATE: 29-Aug-2012
-TOP-3ECRET|
(After a week's fighting, Israeli losses are
estimated at 100-105 aircraft, 650-700 tanks, as
many as 4 ships, and 2,700-3,200 men. Arab losses
are estimated at 210-220 aircraft, 950-1,000 tanks,
20-25 ships, and 12,600-15,600 men. Supply problems
appear most acute for the Israelis; pilots yesterday
were instructed to conserve both fuel and ordnance.
The movement to Syria of a Jordanian brigade
that was scheduled for tonight reportedly has been
postponed until Sunday night, when it is to take up
a position between Dar'a and Shaykh Miskin. However,
there may be further delays because of opposition to
the move from high-level government figures. These
critics fear that the brigade may be chewed up before
it ever arrives, and question why Jordan's force
should move before those of such other conservative
Arab states as Saudi Arabia. For his part, King
Husayn reported still intends to commit the Jordanian unit.
Fatah, the largest fedayeen organization, may be
preparing to g~ien mrcnolitrssi he
- Middle East.I
the attacks will come
if the US supplies Israe wi aircraft or involves
the Sixth Fleet in the current hostilities.- In other
fedayeen actions, the Palestine Liberation Organization last night accused Jordan of "actual coordination" with Israel, .and called on soldiers of the Jordanian Army .to fight Israel even if it meant the downfall of King Husayn. The fedayeen themselves continue
to carry out minor operations against Israel. As of
11 October, all of Fatah's principal military commanders were in southern Lebanon, and the Fatah command
had infiltrated 55 commandos across the border into
IsraelIThe_Soviet Ambassador to Lebanon,
has counse ed
Fatah chief Yasir Arafat and PopuJar Front for the
13 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin. 2
TO -ISELERRET .
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOO DATE: 29-Aug-2012'
-TOP SERE
CLiberation of Palestine head Habbash that they should
avoid provocative acts for the present, but be prepared to enter the fray immediately if Lebanon becomes
embroiled in the fighting with Israel.
Muhammad Haykal, chief editor of -the authoritative
Egyptian newspaper Al Ahram, has joined in the call
for using oil as a weapon to bring pressure against
the US. Reacting to news reports that senior US officials were about to make decisions to help Israel
militarily, Haykal warned in an Al Ahram article that - Arab oil producers have the powerto a"ny the US
access to its interests in the Middle East." Reports
from both Cairo and Kuwait indicate that anti-American
feeling is growing among the general population largely in
response to quasi-official media attacks on the US.
13 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 3
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOO DATE: 29-Aug-2012
.USSR - US - MIDDLE EAST: The Soviets are using discussions with US officials to create the impression that. the Arab-Israeli war should not be allowed to interfere with the "larger picture" of Soviet-US detente.
The Soviet for example,
that it was important ror the two superpowers to remain friends and
not permit the Arab-Israeli war to alter the relationship developed over the past year. Soviet
took a similar line
wit their US counterparts the same day, indicating
that the Soviets have used a circular diplomatic message to instruct their representatives along these
lines. The Soviet said that both
sides would be obliged to resupply their allies with
war materiel, but that this should not affect relations between the US and USSR. The Soviets are also
querying US officials on the possible nature of the
US effort in behalf of Israel, including the possible
introduction of US military personnel and the resupply
of F-4 Phantom fighter aircraft.
A carefully worded TASS statement of 12 October
that protested Israeli attacks on the Soviet Cultural
Center in Damascus and a Soviet merchant vessel in a
Syrian port testifies to Moscow's concern over possible sources of pressure on the USSR to increase its
own involvement. The statement noted that the "Soviet
people" (not the Soviet Government) strongly condemned
Israeli bombing of civilian targets; .a TASS statement
is of course less authoritative than a govermental one.
TASS warned, however, that the USSR cannot regard Israeli actions "indifferently" and that Israel's continued failure to observe international law "will
lead to grave consequences."
S
13 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 4
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFOO DATE: 29-Aug-2012
S
13 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 5
po or leaseT
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 29-Aug-2012]
USSR - MIDDLE EAST: Soviet airbornedivisions
have gone into an increased state of readiness, probably because of the Middle East conflict.
The Soviets also placed at least one airborne division on alert during the 1967 Arab-Israeli
conflict.
The fall exercise activity in Eastern Europe has proceeded on schedule, and Grechko is in Warsaw to
celebrate the 30th Anniversary of the Polish Army.
Some unusual movements of transport aircraft
have occurred and certain transport units appear to
be in an increased alert status, but this probably
is a result of the resupply activity under wav
the USSR and the Middle East.
13 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 6
Approved for Release: 2012/09/04
PPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 15-Oct-2012
13 October 1973
Arab-Israeli Hostilities:.. Two Scenarios
The Arab-Israeli war is approaching a decisive turning
point. Because of the lack of detailed information concerning several critical variables, it is impossible to predict
with great confidence how events on the battlefield will
develop. We have, however, in this paper constructed what
seem to be the most likely alternative scenarios and their
implications.
Scenario. I: Israeli Retribution
Introduction
When the fighting began on Saturday, the Israeli reserves
were not mobilized. Only blocking forces were deployed in the
areas where the Syrians and the Egyptians attacked. Israel's
strategy was to hold on until their mobilized strength could
be pressed against the Arabs.. This strategy appears to be
working. The small number of Israeli. troops initially deployed
on the Golan Heights held long enough for the mobilized force
to get into position and the tide of battle has turned in
Israel's favor. Along the Suez Canal, the Bar Lev defense
line has done the job of tripping the Egyptian offensive. The
attacking Egyptian forces have not driven deep into the Sinai.
The Israeli strategy at this point appears to be to destroy the Syrian military forces while simply containing the
large Egyptian force that has crossed over to the east bank
of the Suez Canal. Once the job on the Syrian front is completed--probably within a few days--the Israelis will most
likely attempt to launch a major offensive against the
Egyptians.
Assessment at Mid-Week
On the Golan Heights, the Syrians have fought better than
anticipated. To stop the drive, the Israelis relied primarily
on their air power, but this has proved to be costly in aircraft losses. Time was bought, however, and sufficient armor
I"
.9.yt..r3' . y . ",; ,".-b.r. t~.4 L 5'Y+ Gr ., +c.. i" L t .
PPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 15-Oc - 012
strength is now in the area for the Israelis to press the
counterattack across the 1967 cease-fire line and on to
Damascus. The highest Israeli priority will be the destruction of the Syrian forces rather. than additional territorial
gains.
In the Sinai, the overall levelof action has been less
intense. The Egyptians moved quickly and. easily. across the
Canal and were able to rapidly establish several bridgeheads.
The Israeli forces along the Canal itself at the time numbered
only a few thousand men, equipped with .about two .hundred tanks.
- -These outnumbered units fought a delaying action before being
forced to abandon virtually all the Bar Lev Line. outposts on
the east bank of the canal.
Israel's main force in Sinai has not yet been committed,
however. It now appears that..the Israelis are holding back
until the reserves from Israel can link up. When all is in
place, the Israelis will strike back with a counterattack
intended to destroy the Egyptians forces now in Sinai.
- Israel's Capability to Do It
The major determining factor in the overall strategy is
whether Israel still has the strength to launch major counterattacks. Because the Arabs have fought well, Israel's .losses
have been higher than anticipated. Measured against the .size
of the total .force, however, it still appears that the Israelis
have sufficient numbers of aircraft, tanks, and men to achieve
their objective--to roll back the attackers to the 1967 line
and destroy the attacking Syrian and Egyptian forces.
A Jordanian entry into the war would draw off Israel's
strength from the Syrian front. The Israelis can probably
handle the Jordanian forces without heavy losses, but they
would be forced to alter the timetable of.their plans on the
other more important fronts.
Israel's aircraft losses are probably the most serious
element in the equation. About 100 planes have been lost
out of Israel's total. inventory of some 350 combat aircraft.
The Israelis reportedly have now cleared most of the SAM
defenses from the Golan Heights; unless the Syrians receive
major re-supply of SAM's Israeli aircraft losses probably
will be low on the Syrian front.
' 2
PPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 15-Oct- 012
On the Egyptian front, the Israelis can expect to lose
more planes. Egypt's SAM defenses are still largely in place
and only a small part of its air force has been committed.
Once the Israelis begin counterattacking in force, however,
the totgl strength of the Egyptian air force should enter the
battle. To conserve their aircraft, the Israelis may rely on
their armor to destroy the Egyptian forces in Sinai.
In terms of tanks, the Israelis have lost some 600
tanks. Although their loss is about 30 percent of the total
tank inventory, the Israelis have more tanks now than they
did when. the 1967 war broke out. In the absence of a new
threat on the Eastern Front, the Israelis have sufficient
ground and air combat strength to destroy the Egyptian forces
in the Sinai. The Israelis also may decide to cross the Canal
to destroy the remaining elements of the Egyptian Army, even
at the expense of heavy casualties.
And finally manpower. The Israelis may. have suffered
losses of more than 1,000 men--already several hundred more
than were lost in the Six Day War. This is still a .small
percentage of Israel's entire mobilized force of some 300,000
men, however. Manpower losses are not. likely to be a determining factor in Israeli strategy at this stage of the war.
The losses will only fill the Israelis with greater resolve
to strike back hard.
Conclusion
In the Israeli mind, this war is the "Day of Judgment
War". It has become a no-holds-barred affair., and the
Israelis are determined to punish the Arabs. Chief of Staff
David Elezar has said that the objective now is to "break
their bones."
Given this mental state, the Israelis probably are
willing to pay the high cost in men and equipment necessary
to demonstrate the consequences of attacking Israel. This
war is becoming .increasingly bloody, and from Israel's point
of view, cannot continue over a long period of time.
3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 15-Oct-2012
Scenario II: Stalemate
Introduction.
Each day that goes by without significant Israeli success
in defeating or dislodging the Egyptian forces from the east
bank of the Suez Canal strengthens the Arab resolve and increases the possibility of additional Arab.forces joining the
war. The prospects that the Egyptians will be able to continue to hold their positions on the Suez Canal over.the
next week are fair to gaad, and, as time elapses, the Egyptians probably will become stronger and extend their positions
even deeper into Israeli-held territory. The factors favoring the Egyptians are:
-- the momentum derived from the success thus far of.
attacking the.Israelis without instant defeat and disastrous lo.sses
-- the sheer weight of .numerical advantage in equipment
and manpower;
*-- the climate of international opinion, especially
African and Western European;
- a much improved air defense- system that has denied
the Israelis the kind of complete air superiority they
had in 1967;
-- a better logistic situation than that of the Israelis;
,N
-- the prospects of the support of other Arab countries
in terms of men, equipment, and supplies;
-- the option of using oil for political leverage.
Momentum
It has taken the Israelis five days of very heavy fighting to dislodge the Syrians from the Golan Heights and they
have thus far been unable to turn back the Egyptians forces
occupying the east bank of .the Canal. Both the Arabs and
Israelis have sustained heavy losses, but the impact of these
losses appears to be greater on Israel than on the Arabs
because the Israeli manpower and equipment base is much
smaller. The Israelis appear to have lost about 30 percent
.. 4
fS cRE
PPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 15-Oct-2012
of . their tanks and nearly 25 percent of their aircraft. Other
Arab countries, however, have significant quantities of both
that gA 1,e made available to Egypt and Syria..
Although .the Syrians have been dislodged from .the Golan
heights, the fighting in that area has required the commitment of large quantities of Israeli resources. The Israelis,
however, will probably have to maintain large parts of their
ground forces in this area in the event the Syrians, either
by themselves or with reinforcements from other Arabs,. launch
a counterattack. The fact that the Syrians have successfully
tied up a substantial portion of the Israeli forces for about
five days -has no't only given the Arabs a crucial boost in
morale, but has facilitated the Egyptian operation to place
and maintain troops into the Sinai.
On the Suez Canal front, the Israelis claim the Egyptians
have put some 40,000 troops and 700-800 tanks across the canal
into the Sinai. The Israelis have put some of the tanks out
of operation but they have not been successful in knocking
- out the bridges across the canal. They concede that the
Egyptians continue to-reinforce .their bri'dgeheads.
Numbers
Egypt and Syria together have greater quantities of
military equipment than Israel. When war broke out, Egypt
and Syria had a 2:1 edge in tank inventory and a 2.5:1.edge
in aircraft inventory over the Israelis. After nearly a.week.
of fighting, both sides have sustained. heavy losses, but the
ratio of inventories.has shifted slightly in favor of the
Egyptians and Syrians. Those. Arab countries now hold a 2.15:1
edge in tanks. and 1.65:1 edge in aircraft. Other Arab countries that are not now directly involved in the fighting have
significant quantities of equipment that can be .made available
to Egypt and Syria.
The implication of this kind of Arab superiority in
equipment is that the Arabs.can afford heavier losses than
the Israelis. In fact, Arab losses have been only slightly
higher than those. of the Israelis--certainly in a much smaller
ratio. than the equipment holdings at the beginning of.the war.
If the two -sides were to continue to .suffer losses at the present rate for a period of a few weeks, the attrition would
be far more serious for the Israelis than the Arabs.
s~5.
riw. S.
|APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 15-Oct 012
Equipment
The Egyptians and Syrians have greatly improved their air
defense networks. Large quantities of sophisticated SAM equipment have been sent to and deployed in both countries. Although the Israelis may ultimately be able to neutralize these
systems, the Israeli loss of aircraft will be high.
Pilot and equipment fatigue is another important factor.
The Israelis have been logging long hours in the. air while
the Arabs and especially the Egyptians have committed relatively few of their aircraft to the battle.
Logistics
Although the evidence is not firm, there are indications
that the Arabs are in a better supply position for ammunition
and petroleum than Israel. The Israelis reportedly are seeking additional supplies of 105 mm and 155 mm ammunition.
Conversely, the Egyptians are expending ammunition and .missiles
at a rate that suggests to the Israelis that there is no
shortage. Furthermore, at least 33 Soviet military-related
AN-12s have flown to Syria in the past several days and five
AN-22s have gone to Egypt, all probably with military supplies.
Additional AN-12s are scheduled to fly to Egypt.
Support by Other Arab Countries
As the fighting rages, other Arab countries are showing
signs of supporting the. Egyptians and Syrians. Although the
individual contributions may not be large, commulatively they
could be significant. If the present combatants are able to
continue the battle and are not defeated by the Israelis, the
other Arabs could become infected with the smell of victory
and join in..
The Libyans still have about 60 Mirage aircraft in their
inventory, and there is evidence that a few of these have
been made available to Egypt. The Moroccans have announced
that they will send another 2,500 or so troops to the fighting. Baghdad has indicated that it will provide SU-7s and
MIG-21s to the Syrian front and perhaps as many as 16,000
Iraqi troops and.100 tanks are on their way to Syria. Algeria
has sent air units to Egypt. Saudi Arabia reportedly intends
to send a combat brigade to Syria and may provide some aircraft. Tunisia, Sudan, and Kuwait reportedly have provided
small elements to the fighting, or may do so.
6
V 44 5.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 15-Oct-2012 -
If support comes to Egypt and Syria from virtually all
of the Arab countries, it is going to be difficult for King
Husayn to remain on the sidelines. This is especially true
if the Arabs continue to be able to prevent a total defeat
by the :srael.is. A decision by Husayn to enter the fighting
on the side of the Arabs would place a good deal of pressure
on the Israelis.
Conclusion
The Arabs are approaching the point where, if they are
willing to pay the price, they might be able to wear down
the Israelis to the extent that the Israelis would be willing
to settle for a cease-fire roughly along the present lines of
battle. This would be tantamount to a victory in Arab terms.
since it would shatter the myth of Israeli invincibility.
Moreover, while the Arabs may hope to ultimately regain
Palestine, even a few kilometers of Sinai could be regarded
as positive .movement in that direction.
For the Israelis a stalemate along the present lines of
battle would be tantamount psychologically to a military
defeat.
Implications for Third Parties
The interests of outside parties will be affected to
* - varying degrees by the current hostilities. The US and the
USSR, with the deepest involvement in the Middle East, are
both the most vulnerable and have thy most at stake. In
general, US interests in the Middle East will suffer, at
least in the .short run, and they could be seriously damaged
in the Arab states. The Soviets stand to lose the influence
they have built up in the area if they appear to be absent
in a time of dire Arab need. The West Europeans prefer to
remain uninvolved, but they are highly dependent on Arab oil
and .in the final analysis are prepared to do what appears
necessary to protect their oil supply. Japan's low profile,
aimed at preserving good relations with oil producing states,
will keep it largely unaffected unless the Arabs impose a
general oil embargo.
I ~ -
APPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE 12
Two important general implications should be noted:
- Time is a critical element. The longer the fighting continues the greater will be the pressures on the.
US and USSR to intervene and for other Arab states, 4M
Jordan, to become involved in the fighting. There will
also be an increasing tendency to look for scapegoats and
foreign interests to lash out at. Also, the more destructive the war, the more difficult will be the post-war
- peace settlement effort.
- -- To the .extent that the superpowers become involved
in major military supply to the combatants, the chances
of a US-USSR confrontation will increase, as will the
Arab threats to embargo oil shipments and .other anti-US
actions. At the same time, because .of their identification with different sides of the conflict, the US and
USSR both have a need to demonstrate. a willingness to
fulfill commitments if they wish to be taken seriously
in the future.
Implications of Scenario I: Israeli. Retribution
If the Israelis are able to destroy the Syrian army
within the next .few days and then demolish the Egyptian armed
forces now in Sinai, US problems in the Arab world will increase. Anti-US reaction will be greatly magnified if there
is coincidence between US resupply of Israel and a decisive
turn in the tide of battle against the Arab forces.. The
Arab states would,- in these circumstances, see the US as a
major instrument in causing the Arab forces to lose the fruits
*of the one victory they have won over Israel--a victory which
involved the retaking of previously captured Arab territory.
The objective circumstances of .an Arab defeat would matter
little..
More specifically, the following would probably occur:
-- Oil producing states would attempt'to embargo oil
shipments to the US or at least reduce total oil output
by 'an amount equal. to that normally shipped to the US.
This would greatly increase competition among oil consuming states for available oil, since there is little
spare producing capacity in the world. However, an
effective embargo of oil to one country is very difficult
to enforce, and the Arab oil producing states would be
8
_$EGRET
PPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 15-Oct-2012
hesitant to harm Western Europe.and Japan, even to get at the
US, as. long. as Europe and Japan stay neutral in the ctprent
conflict. The greater the magnitud.e of the Israeli Mtliagy
success, the more likely .it would be that oil producing states
would reduce shipments to Western Europe. ~In this case the
Europeans would have less refined products to export to the
US which would have an immediate impact on our current supply
problem. Even the threat of oil embargo would cause a number
of European governments to deny US overflights for military
resupply to Israel.
-- The chances of the US developing a cooperative longrange relationship with Saudi Arabia and other Arab oil
states in the Gulf; (whose output will be needed to supply
5 million bpd of projected oil imports by the late 1970s)
would be. put in serious jeopardy.
-- Pressure would mount on the USSR to come more directly
to the aid of the Syrians and Egyptians. (In 1967, the
USSR issued a vigorous warning to desist when it seemed
as if the Israelis might be prepared-to drive into Damascus.) If the Soviets backed away from the Arabs in their
time of need, they would in effect be writing off an area
of the world to which they have consistently given very
high priority.
* Implications of Scenario II: Stalemate
An outcome of the war in which Egyptian forces held some
territory on the East bank of the Suez Canal and the fighting
ended. without significant new Israeli territorial gains on
the Syrian front could be less damaging in.terms of Arab
attitudes toward the US than an Israeli victory that crushed
the Egyptian and Syrian military forces. But this. would only
be the case if the Israelis decided. on such a cease-fire soon
rather than as a result of being repulsed in an attempt to
take on the Egyptians in Sinai after destruction of the Syrian
forces.
More specifically:
-- The Israeli strategic military situation would be
relatively unchanged. They would still, for instance,
retain unilateral control over most of the Sinai buffer,
including the critical passes. The vulnerable Israeli
flanks to the north. (Syria and Lebanon) and east (Jordan)
-would still be protected by the results of the 1967 'war.
9.-
PPROVED FOR RELEASE - CIA INFO DATE: 15-Oct-2012
-- The Soviets would be off the spot with their Arab
friends, at least enough to avoid further direct intervention other than the emergency resupply of expendibles.
The Soviet position. in the Arab world would also emerge
from the war relatively unimpaired.
*-- The threat of an Arab oil embargo would be significantly reduced.-
-- A possibility might exist for starting a new effort
to promote a final settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The Israelis might finally come to realize that
over the long run the odds against their survival increase
unless they are able to reconcile their differences with.
the Arabs. The Arabs, having regained a measure of pride
and confidence, might begin to also think seriously about
going to the negotiating .table. In any event the Arabs
would not harbor the same bitter taste of complete defeat
that they have felt since 1967 and which led them.into
the .present fighting.
Over even the slightly long run it becomes very difficult,
if not impossible, to estimate the post-war situation in the
Middle East.. A.catalytic event like a-major war can result
in very important changes in the political environment that
present new opportunities for both the forces of peace and
instability. But most of how the war ends and the role of
* the super powers in ending or extending will determine the
future.
10.
+iY er-r ..tl.it+ii , '- 3 4 , r.. _ .yr." " c
" ' Y gp~ -,
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1 TN '\A 25X1
THlE ARAB OIL CUTBACK AND HIGHER PRICES:
.IMPLICATIONS AND REACTEONS
Secret
19 October 1973
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
A. The Oil Weapon and Its Effects
On 17 October the Organization. of Arab Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OAPEC) decided to cut oil production.
- Production will be reduced by not less than 5% a month
until an Israeli withdrawal from , occupied territories is
completed and the "legal rights" of the Palestinians are
restored;
- The Arab countries also promised to maintain oil deliveries
to "friendly" countries that give Arabs "effective material
help"; and
-- Threatened a total embargo of countries that used their
armed forces to aid Israel.
Many parts of the statement were left deliberately vague in brder to
allow each Arab country a degree of freedom to act according to its own
best interests. This ambiguity - similar to that of OPEC decisions in the
past - is intended to give the OAPEC agreement greater durability by giving
each country greater flexibility. All of the states are obliged to cut
production by 5% a month, but the way is open for some to make larger
cuts. The Arabs did not define those "friendly" countries that will continue
to receive normal imports from the Arab World. They probably will cut
back shipments to neutral states such as the United Kingdom and Japan
and may cut back shipments to such states as France and Italy that are
"tilting" their neutrality toward the Arabs. In any event, the final
interpretation of the definition is left to the individual producing country.
At least in the first months, the Arab monthly production cutback
will probably be between 5% and 10%, but closer to the 5% rate. Saudi
Arabia has reportedly already cut current production by 10%. Some other
countries - such as Iraq, which is unable to export most of its production
because of the closure of eastern Mediterranean ports - may make a virtue
of necessity and make very large initial cuts. An all-Arab cutback of between
5% and 10% would represent a loss of between one million and two million
barrels per day (b/d).
Several countries, including Libya, Abu Dhabi, Kuwait, and Saudi
Arabia, have either announced or threatened a total embargo against the
United States. However, the United States receives only about
1.6 million b/d of Arab oil (including products refined in Europe and the
SECRET
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
Caribbean). Thus, even if the embargo were effective, the effect on the
United States would be relatively small, and, after the first month, the
brunt of the cutback would fall on Europe and Japan. Moreover, the US
companies that produce most Middle East oil might be able to shift supplies
among themselves to avoid the embargo. The companies .would, of course,
hesitate to do this for fear of jeopardizing their relations with the producing
countries as well as with Western Europe and Japan.
It seems inevitable that Western Europe and Japan will bear the brunt
of the progressive cutbacks. Western Europe is dependent on Arab oil for
70% of its consumption, and Japan depends on the Arabs for 40% of its
supply. The producer states recognize that it is "unjust" to punish Europe
and Japan more severely than the United States, but see no other alternative.
The Saudis have informed representatives of the major West European
nations that they will te expected to pressure the United States. They have
also suggested to the Japanese that they make a statement before the UN
General Assembly to the effect that Japan desires an early settlement to
the war and that it supports the Arab position.
From the point of view of United States vulnerability, it is Ierhaps
fortunate that this particular crisis occurred now rather than a few years
hence. It had been predicted that we would be importing nearly 5 million
barrels per day of Arab oil or 21%-22% of our consumption by 1980. With
this level of exports an Arab cutoff would severely affect our economy.
Even now there are domestic as well as foreign pressures for policy changes
as a result of the current cutoff. In any event, the rapid increase in the
price of imported oil should dampen our consumption and make other
domestic energy sources more attractive, for example oil from Colorado
shales and coal gasification.
Although the West European countries are attempting to form a
common position regarding the oil cutback, division tendencies may prove
too strong. Joint contingency plans exist, but, because of the different
countries' different views of their own advantage, the plans may not be
used efectively. Individual countries also have developed plans for dealing
with a crisis on a national basis. Some reportedly are updating rationing
systems worked out during earlier crises and have stocks of rationing books
ready for distribution. At the same time, a few European countries, notably
France, still entertain hopes that the Arab oil production cutback will not
apply to them.
The immediate impact from war damage and production cutbacks will
vary considerably among EC members. The shutdown of three eastern
Mediterranean pipelines already has dropped Italy's oil imports by some
SECRET
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
24% and France's by 14%, while affecting other members' imports only
moderately or not at all. Because of the large difference in shipping
distances, those nations such as West Germany that depend most heavily
on North African oil will feel the pinch of a production cutback much
sooner than those such as the Benelux countries that depend on Persian
Gulf .supplies (see the table). Italy already has imposed an embargo on
refined oil exports outside the EC - a move detrimental to US supplies
that may be emulated by other Community members if the supply situation
worsens.
Over the next few months, the impact of reduced oil imports will
be partly mitigated by reserve stocks maintained by the EC nations. All
have about a two-month supply on hand, and France reportedly has a 90-day
reserve. Arab oil, however, accounts for between 63% and 78% of EC
members' oil imports and a similar share of their total consumption. As
a result, a 5%-10% cumulative monthly reduction in production by the Arab
states, together with already interrupted pipeline deliveries, would soon
force EC nations to draw heavily on riserve stocks. If current consumption
levels were maintained, these reserves might be depleted within six months,
and total available supplies could be reduced to one-half of normal.
Conservation measures could delay the depletion of reserves by at most
another few months.
EC Nations' Dependence on Arab Oil, by Source, 1972
Percent of Total Imports
Persian Gulf North African Persian Gulf Total
by Pipelines by Tanker by Tanker Arab
(Now Inoperative) (7-day Delivery) (35-day Delivery) Crude
Italy 24 19 26 69
France 14 18 46 78
United Kingdom 5 15 48 68
West Germany 4 .39 29 72
Benelux 6 4 53 63
Denmark .... 1 66 67
The Effects of a 5% Cutback Over Time
The following 5 graphs show the cumulative effects of a five percent
all-Arab production cutback on the United States, Western Europe, and
Japan under different conditions.
- 3
SECRET
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
SECRET
Clearly such a production cutback, if it persisted for a number of
months, would require some belt tightening. But, the analysis shows that
by moderate belt tightening and drawing down existing stocks of petroleum,
we can avoid a serious crisis this winter. This posture is illustrated best
by Figure 5, which shows that a 5% reduction in consumption in the United
States and a 10% reduction in consumption in Western Europe and Japan,
together with stock drawdowns and a 300,000 barrel per day combined,
surge in the United States and Venezuelan production, even Western Europe
and Japan would not face a real crisis for some time.
This does not mean that there would not be dislocations and regional
problems in the United States as well as in Western Europe. For example,
heating oil problems in the United States east coast would worsen somewhat.
Moreover, the United States would come under considerable pressure
to share to some extent with Western Europe and Japan if they should
come to believe that their supplies were to be cut back for several months.
In this event our own belt tightening might have to. be greater than the
5% shown in the illustration.
4
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
Figure 1
Time Paths of Consumption, Under No Sharing,
No Stock Withdrawals, No Rationing, and a Five
Percent per Month Cutback in OAPEC Exports
Consumption in Million Barrels Per Day
17.5
15. US
.7.51
Western Europe
Japan 2 .5 | | I I I | I | I 0 5 10 15 2 TiireinMonths
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
Figure 2
Time Paths of Consumption, Under Consumption
Sharing, No Stock Withdrawals, No Rationing, and a
Five Percent per Month Cutback in OAPEC Exports
Consumption in Million Barrels Per Day
Western Europe
7.5
5 .0
Japan
2 .51 | | | I | |
0 5 10 15 20 Tien Months
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 :NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
Figure 3
Time Paths of Consumption, Under Import Sharing, No Stock Withdrawals, No Rationing, and a Five
Percent Cutback per Mbnth in OAPEC Exports
Consumption in Million Barrels Per Day
17.5
US
12
10.01
1 -
I.
-7.51
I Western Europe
0 5 10 15 20
Time in opnths
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
Figure 4
Time Paths of Consumption, Under No Sharing, Stock Withdrawals
to Cover Import Losses Until Stocks are Depleted, No
Rationing, and a Five Percent' per Month Cutback
in OAPEC Exports
Consumption in Million Barrels Per Day
17.5o -
- -6 US
15.01
12.51
10.01
7.51
5.01
0I Western Europe
Japan 2 .51 | 1 1 1 1 | 1 1
0 5 10 15 20 Time in yNnths
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
Figure 5
"
Timre Paths of Consumption, Under No Sharing, Stock
Withdrawals to Cover Inport Losses Until Stocks are
Depleted, 300,000 Barrels Per Day Surge in US Production, Five Percent Reduction in US Consumption,
Ten Percent Reduction in European and Japanese Consumption, and a Five Percent per Month Cutback in
OAPEC Exports
Consumption in Million Barrels Per Day
17.51
-- -o US
15.01
.1
12.*5
10.01
7.51
5.0-'
Western Europe
I Japan 2 .51 1 I I I I I I I J
0 5 10 15 20 Time in Mnths
0
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
SECRET
B; The Impact of Increased Oil Prices
The increase in oil prices will be felt primarily in the United States,
Japan, and Western Europe. The oil import bills of the United States and
Japan will each increase by about S3 billion, while the additional cost to
Western Europe will approach S8 billion. This assumes that deliveries from
the Gulf will continue as scheduled prior to the announcement of
production limitations.
- The oil price rise will turn an expected S I billion or so 1974
US trade surplus into a roughly $2 billion deficit
The Canadian trade balance will be virtually unaffected
because Canadian oil imports are roughly equal to exports
Japan, which imports about 43% of its oil from the Arab
countries, will have a 1974 surplus of about $3 billion,
compared with a previous estimate of $6 billion.
- The West Germans will pay an additional cost of about
$1.8 billion - the highest in Europe - but they will feel
the least hardship because their 1974 trade surplus will be
on the order of $8 billion.
- Petroleum imports will push the UK trade deficit from about
$3.5 billion to almost $5 billion.
- The OPEC action will add $1.5 billion to the oil import
bill of both France and Italy. The price increases will reduce
the French surplus to near zero. Italy's small deficit in 1973
was expected to narrow further but should now be in the
$1.5 billion-S2 billion range.
Some of the impact of higher oil prices in the consuming countries
will be offset by greater repatriation of oil company profits and larger
exports to the producers, generated by their greater export income. Only
part of the worldwide producer revenue increases of $15 billion will be
spent, however. The 1974 oil revenues of Saudi Arabia, Abu Dhabi, Qatar,
and Kuwait will approach the amounts recently estimated for 1980. These
countries have only limited absorptive capacities.
Although the trade balances of the oil importers will deteriorate
sharply, the impact on their domestic economies will probably be slight.
Oil imports do not compete with domestic production so there should be
no initial offsetting loss in jobs. The consuming countries' non-petroleum
trade and production will essentially be the same as before the oil price
5
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
increase. Moreover, the sharp rise in crude oil prices should not significantly
increase the price of finished goods.
The use to which the oil producers put their reserves could have an
appreciable impact on the international exchange rate system and, through
the exchange system,ultimately on the volume of exports and imports.
If, for example, the producers decide to-hold most of their increased receipts
in dollars, the dollar will strengthen in exchange markets. A dollar
appreciation means more expensive - and therefore reduced - US exports.
In effect, the oil producers will be converting their trade surpluses with
other consumers into trade surpluses with the United States; or, in another
view, the US trade account with Japan, Canada, and Western Europe will
deteriorate by the amount 'of the increase in their oil import bills.
As the oil producers' reserves increase, their threat to exchange markets
will also increase. The Arab oil states already have enough liquid foreign
assets - around SS-S7 billion ' to temporarily disrupt currency markets.
Although there is no evid'ence of any substantial dollar sales during the
current crisis, and an attack on the dollar would result in the depreciation
of the Arabs' own reserve holding, it is not inconceivable that - if the
political and military situation becomes increasingly unacceptable to them -
the Arab leadership would move against the dollar. On Thursday, Libya
publicly called for concerted Arab dollar sales and withdrawal of deposits
from US banks.
6
SECRET
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassicati 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
C. Foreign Reaction
Western Europe
There is very little the West Europeans can do in the near term to
get their oil deliveries back to strength. They will, of course, continue to
distance themselves from Washington's present Middle Eastern policy - in
speeches, in UN votes, and in the denial of overflight and refueling rights
- for US military aircraft. But no European leader expects such behavior to
cause Washington to rethink its position or entirely to save Europe from
the effects of the oil embargo. Indeed, the West Europeans probably are
overly conscious of their impotence to influence the present situation; they
are more inclined to "keep their heads low" in the hope of warding off
still greater threats to their energy supply.
At the moment, the West Europeans are eager to discuss oil problems
with the United States, hoping naturally that the United States will agree I
to share supplies (and shortages). But if such agreements are not forthcoming
from Washington - and if oil shortages begin to bite severely - the
Europeans would try at least to keep all the oil they can get for themselves
by reducing or eliminating their exports of refined oil to the United States.
In such a scramble, they would be more likely to act unilaterally than
on a joint European-wide basis.
There is some inconsistency between the European desire to minimize
association with US political policy in the Middle East crisis and European
awareness that some form of cooperation arrangement for coping with oil
shortage must necessarily involve US-European conversation. This
inconsistency is both real and apparent. The Europeans will try to resolve
it insofar as they can, by working for quiet talks within OECD forum on
oil matters, while avoiding political initiatives unless and until the time seems
ripe for a mediation role that would not alienate the Arabs.
Over the longer run, the present experience will further encourage the
West Europeans to decrease their reliance on the major oil companies and
to develop instead their own arrangements with oil producing governments.
They would focus on offers of government-to-government agreements that
would involve European technical assistance in return for supply
commitments, and possibly trade preferences for oil producing states. An
obvious side effect of such a policy would be lessened European willingness
to join in consumer cooperation schemes on terms favorable to the United
States or - depending on US-Arab relations in the postwar world - be
associated with the United States in oil cooperation schemes on any terms
at all.
7
SECRET
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-i.1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
Japan
The Japanese have always sought to avoid taking sides in contentious
situations involving Middle East oil. In the last year, the Japanese have
refused to join an oil consumers organization, for fear of antagonizing the
oil producers in OPEC. There has been an ongoing debate in Japan for
some time over the merits of multilateral versus go it alone approaches
to assuring oil supplies.
Japan's policy in regard to the present petroleum supply situation rests
almost entirely on the hope that the current Middle East crisis can be
defused before severe sanctions are enacted by the Arabs. Tokyo is being
urged by the Arab states, with Saudi Arabia taking the lead, to issue an
official statement supporting the Arab position in the current conflict. The
Arabs have avoided accompanying such requests with threats of a serious
disruption in the flow of oil to Japan. Nevertheless, the implied threat of
economic blackmail has not been lost on the Japanese. The Japanese are
extremely reluctant to abandon their neutral position on the Middle East
primarily because of the serious impact such a step would have onlelations
with the United States, in particular with regard to existing plans for
bilateral cooperation in the field of energy-petroleum sharing. Foreign
Minister Ohira, on 19 October, sought to sidestep an Arab request for direct
political support when he told a group of Arab envoys that Japan favors
settlement through the United Nations and noted that Japan supported the
1967 Security Council resolution calling for Israeli withdrawal from
occupied Arab territory.
Tokyo's political tightrope walk will have difficulty surviving an
indefinite prolongation or heightening of Arab pressure. If backed to the
wall by credible Arab threats of a cut off of oil, the Japanese will probably
give in. As a contingency measure, the Japanese Government is already
studying drafts of a statement supporting the Arab position that could be
used in such a forum as the UN General Assembly. But Japan would first
make a last ditch effort to secure assistance from the United States in the
form of diversion of some US oil supplies to Japanese needs.
8"
SECRET
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
ANNEX
Selected Tables
SECRET
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
E_- rId Oil Trade ay, 1973
qTo : Crx:cic
Cc:us:- Pcduc.- otal Total Saoti Abu Al- Other Vr.'- Irido- Nitin t cn I:-orts MAb Arahin Dh.bi Ktwait Ira Libya seria Ar.u Irr .'t:^ csia Crr.a ceria C!^^rs
.it: Statcs 17,300 10,900 6,300 1,600 600 150 150 50 350 150 150 400 2,000 250 1,100 550 4G0
% of Cons-.ption 100 63.0 36.4 9,2 3.5 0.9 0.9 0.3 2 0.9 0.9 2.3 11.6 1.4 6.4 3.2 2.3
c: r .15,500 400 10,000bf 11,300 4,350 600 1,750 1,300 1,700.- 750 850 1,900 500 Nc3l. 0 1,250 1,050
icn 100. 2.6 103 72.9 28.1 3.9 11.3 0.4 11.0 4.8 5.5 12.3 3.2 Nexjl. 0 8.1 .6.
Ja 5,400 NC-1. 5,400 . 2,300 1,250 300 650 50 Nogl. 0 p0 2,050 Na<jl. 900 0 Nc.jl. 15C
tion 100 Nc'jl. 100 42.6 23.2 5.6 12.0 0.9 N1f1. C 0.9 38.0 Nr:.'l. 16.7 0 Nce21. 2.
c.? h t 1,750 1,850 900 150 -. 50 50 Ne31. Ncgl. 50 0 NcI. 150 450 0 0 100. 5(
of C:::7.:gy
in , . 100 106 51.4. . . 2.9 2.9 N11. Ntvfl. 2.9 0 No.jl. 8.6 25.7 0 0 5.7 2.
S=-'metal 31,90 33,10 f(,00 15,300 6,200 1,100 2,550 1,400 2,100 900 1,010 4,,00 2,5 ? 0 1,10 1,900 1,r0
lofG:= -
tion, 100 .. 32.9 71.6 38.3 15.6 2.0 6.4 3.5 5.3 2.2 2.6 11.3 7.4. 2.9 2.8 4.8 4.
CC:.ijs;t Arca 9,850 9,300 500 400 Ncejl. Negl. 0 200 100 50 50 100 0 0 0 0 .0
9 ofto>..
ticn 1CO 94.4 5.1 4.1 Neal Ne';1. 0 2.0 1.0 0.5 0.5 1.0 0 0 0 0 0
G :rs 7,200 34,550 4,900 2,850 1,750 50 550 300 0 150 50 1,100 450 100 0 100 30
:ion 100 480 68.1 39.6 24.3 0.7 7.6 4.2 0 2.1 0.7 15.3 6.2 1.4 0 1.4 4.
37,l 3.70. c_/ 14/O !Rf2 1,0 _1,'00 3300 .1t'00. g200 .J300 1150 ,700 3,400 1,250 1,J00 7JC00 1,9'
<. Ct 00 100 59.G 32.G 14.0 2.0 5.4 3.3 3.9 1.9 2.0 10.0 6.0 2.2 1.9 3.5 3.
a. T. on Ji t a:.3 i%!m:: ha:1n, i.e., refined ptd:cts frmcn errort .nir..., .) are tr c'i to rce o' c:od. ei'a : ^
y.'..y a". ,r.- for 1973 c:I .. :ntre ditlor frmn 1oint in time c:ir.at:. 1'or elmilc, US det:ner.ce on bAcc oil : ic.c::: cegh ." y n
r.:.y 2 million b/d in 0:.'sac*.
C.b. 1:.ta:n L':.r.g' oil ?:o;:;.: co w::e ption bccou:; it errorts. cutant3ial quntities of oil out;ide 1irote.
c. I::.-:s US pred:eion of natural ;:s liquitas oi 1.7 million b/d.
1' u t 73
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
EstiftC t Oil ' rade +/, 1973
-ousand Darrel-em r:
Dc::csticc s- Produ~c- Total Total Saly3i M~u Al- Other Vce - Incbt-ort~ rb Ah D 0bi Xwait Sra Libva qria IrM .us:a r.Sia crab czn?' a C'ria CL rs
3 c: States 17,300 10,900 6,300 1,000 G00 150 150 50 350 150 150 400 2,000 250 1,100 550 400
'en 100 63.0 36.4 9;2 3.5 0.9 0.9 0.3 2 0.9 0.9 2.3 11.6 1.4 6.4 3.2 2.3
Fcrn r 15,500 400 16,000f 11,300 4,350 600 1,750 1,300 1,700,- 750 850 1,900 500 Nc31. 0 1,250 1,050
tic: 100. 2.6 103 72.9 28.1 3.9 11.3 8.4 11.0 4.8 5.5 12.3 3.2 Ncgl. 0 8.1 .6.8
n 5,400 Ne31. 5,400 . 2,300 1,250 300 650 50 Nogl. 0 50, 2,050 Nrjl. 900 0 Ncgl. 150
S Cion 100 - gl. ICO 42.6 23.2 5.6 12.0 0.9 N J1l. C 0.9 39.0 NC'. 10.7 0 Neg. 2.8
a 1,750 1,050 900 150- 50 50 Nc'Jl. Ncgl. 50 0 NlC1. 150 450 0 0 100, 50
o: coa car 100 106 51.4. 8.6 2.9 2.9 Nall. NorjI. 2.9 0 NeJ1. 8.6 25.7 0 0 5.7 2.9
w.ut.-t 37,?50 13,150 .n,00 1t,300 6,250 1,100 2,550 1,400 2,100 900 1,050 4,500 2,90 15,10 1100 1,900 1,50
of Gra T
(don 100 32.9 71.G 38.3 15.6 2. 6.4 3.5 5.3 2.2 2.6 11.3 7.4 2.9 2.8 4.8 4.1
: ni;t Arca 9,850 9,300 500 400 Ncal. N(g1. 0 200 100 50 50 100 0 0 0 0 .0
of Gr:>
Len 100 94.4 5.1 4.1 Nal Ngl. 0 2.0 1.0 0.5 0.5 1.0 0 0 0 0 0
7,200 34,550 4,900 2,850 1,750 50 550 300 0 150 50 1,100 450 100 0 100 300
:Tuin 100 480 G8.1 39.6 24.3 0.7 7.6 4.2 0 2.1 0.7 15.3 6.2 1.4 0 1.4 4.2
0i 37.00 57,n00 f 7,00n0 .I.. Fl,000 1,150 3,300 1,00 &2O 1,300 1,170 5,700 1,400 ,..90 1,250 1.100 2v.C 
, of On2:mp- n 1C0 100 59.6 32.6 14.0 2.0 5.4 3.3 . 3.9 1.9 2.0 10.0 G.0 2.2 1.9 3.5 3.4
a. .- I all. r : 5:t~3iir2tb:i~ i.e., rotinal rtu~ccU1 f1:t c.3rt 170.51 cltir' ar t.:i::".1. :.. c::O of cCo. .. _
3. ya. ."r for 1573 "1 .. or ,iifocr frog, joint i.1% Uve cl~ar; 'or Cza:r1, CG a 2:c.o on AC. , oil h.:_ rrc~;c~L ' Gre , "' "y
r..:My 2 r.ill icn b/. in . --
b. -: -":n CC..t's oil :: coxcd c:--ptiCn bccatw:c it cjgort: :uBntianLl cuantitic of oil ouU:ide luroIe.
c. I :-. U5 padc:d~ on of nr.ccal ,jas liquid:: of 1.7 mtillion b/d.-
15 Oet 73
No Objection To-Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
Economics of the Persian Gulf OPECa/ Price Increase
16 October 1973
($/barrel)
Company Owned Crude Oil (75%) Percent
of
1 Oct 73 New Demand Increase
1. Posted Priceb/(Saudi Arabian
Light 340) 3.011 5.11 69.7
2. Royalty (12k% of 1.) .376 .64
3. Production Cost .10 .10
4. Tax Reference "Profit" 1-(2+3) 2.535 4.37
5. Tax (55% of 4) 1.394 2.40
6. Government Revenue (2+5) 1.77 3.04 71.8
7. Cost to Oil Company (3+6)- i.87 3.14 67.9
8. Estimated Oil Company Profit .35 .35 .
9. Estimated Sales Price (fob)
(7+8) 2.22 3.49 57.2
10 stimated Transportation
Costc/ (to US Gulf Coast) 1.48 1.48
1.. US Import Duty .105 .105
12. Estimated Sales Price (cif,
US Gulf Coast) 3.805 5.075 33.4
Government Owned Crude Oil (25%) -
Oil Company Purchases of
Government-Owned (22.5%) 2.30 3.65 58.7
Government Oil Sales to
. Third Parties (2.5%) 3.12 3.65 17.0
.a. The Persian Gulf members-of OPEC.are: Abu Dhabi, Iran, Iraq,
Kuwait, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia. Other members of OPEC are Algeria,
Indonesia, Libya, Nigeria, and Venezuela. The members of the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries are: Abu Dhabi, Algeria,
Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Egypt, Qatar, Saudi Ar:>ia, and Syria.
b. Posted price and tax reference price are synonymous terms.
c. Calculation based on tanker rates of Worldscale 100 which is a
representative average, although spot tanker rates are currently much
hi her;they account for only a small fraction of the oil being transd.
CIA/OER
18 Oct 73
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02 : NLN-H-92-3-7-1
*
a The shutdo-:n of the three eastern Meditcrranean pipelines
Wwhich mainly serve southern Europe has reduced Europe's oil
supplies by about 2 million b/d. Based on very limited infornation, the following is our best estimate of the destination
of crude oil from the closed pipelines:
Destination Volume (b/d)
Western Europe 1,700,000
Italy - 600,000
France 375,000
Benelux 150,000
United Kingdom 100,000
Greece 100,000 .
West Germany 75,000 
Spain 50,000
Portugal 50,000
Turkey 50,000
Austria 50,000
Others and
Unidentified
Western Europe 100,000
Cor.munist countries 200,000
Romania 50,000
Bulgaria 50,000
USSR 50,000
Other Communist
countries 50,000
Other Countries 100,000
TOTAL 2,000,000
CIA/OSR
18 Oct 73
25X1
No Objection To Declassification 2009/04/02: NLN-H-92-3-7-1
25X1
Approved For Release 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T0)975A025500020002-5
C ARAB STATES - ISRAEL: The cease-fire appears
to be working on the Syrian front, but fighting continued through most of yesterday on the Egyptian
front south of the Great Bitter Lake on both banks
of the Suez Canal.
25X1 units of
the Egyptian Third Army on the east bank of the
canal launched a two-pronged, tank-supported attack
east toward the Gidi and Mitla passes, and reportedly
made some significant gains before being halted by
Israeli forces. 25X1
25X1
There is no clear indication, however, as to what
positions the forces involved in the Egyptian thrust
now hold.
Other elements of the Third Army reportedly attacked north along the east bank of the Great Bitter
Lake in an attempt to link u with the Egyptian Second Army. 25X1
25X1
Israeli forces yesterday morning captured the
Egyptian naval base at Adabiyah, south of Suez city.
Fighting continued in and around Suez city yesterday, with the Israelis claiming to have thwarted an
attempt by Egyptian forces there to break out. Earlier in the day, Egyptian armored forces on the west
bank launched an unsuccessful operation to reopen
the road from Cairo to Suez, apparently in an attempt to relieve the Egyptian troops at Suez and
open a bridgehead to the Third Army on the east
bank. According to an Israeli spokesman, some 28
Egyptian aircraft attacked Israeli positions an
hour before the ground attacks. Tel Aviv claims
to have shot down 14 of the attackers. By nightfall, fighting had died down to sporadic artillery
fire.
Large Egyptian forces apparently remain within
the Israeli enclave on the west bank of the canal.
25X1
25 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 1
25X1
Approve d For Release 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A02500020002-5
25X1 Approved For Release 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T00975A025500020002-5
Approved For Release 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A025500020002-5
25X1 Approved Fo Release 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975 025500020002-5
25X1 Elsewhere along the Egyptian tront, the cease-tire appears to be in effect.
Calm generally prevailed along the Syrian front
yesterday, with only sporadic artillery fire reported. | 25X1
25X1 e
Israelis have been shelling tedayeen positions in
Lebanon, however, and have warned Beirut that it
will have to bear the consequences of any further
terrorist activity against Israel by the fedayeen
in Lebanon.
25X1
The Jordanians report that 28 of their troops
have been killed and 50 wounded in action so far.
Eighteen Centurion tanks have been totally destroyed;
15 are damaged but reparable. The Jordanians claim
to have captured four Israeli Centurions--two in
excellent condition.
25X1
(continued)
25 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 2
25X1
Approved For Release 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T00975Ad25500020002-5
Approved For R lease 2004/07108: CIA-RDP79T00975A0 5500020002-5 25X1
C At last night's Security Council session, eight
nonaligned states presented a resolution which would
create a UN emergency peacekeeping force for the Middle East. Their resolution would also enlarge the
existing UN observer force and repeat earlier calls
for an immediate cease-fire and withdrawal to positions held at 1750 GMT Monday.
Earlier in the meeting Egypt had requested Soviet and US troops to enforce the cease-fire. The
Soviet Union argued that the request was justified
by continued Israeli violations of the truce, but
the Soviets made no promise to provide supervisory
forces. The nonaligned states, which have been resentful of US-Soviet dominance of Security Council
actions, then weighed in with their proposal. The
council is scheduled to reconvene at 1030 this morning to debate the draft. If approved, it may
strengthen the policing of the much-violated ceasefire, which has no enforcement provisions, and is
supervised only by UN observers in the area under
the 1967 mandate.
All seven UN observation teams presently planned
for the Egyptian side of the cease-fire line have
been dispatched and are reporting. The situation
is confused, however, because most teams are not
certain where the opposing front lines are, and
three teams on the southern sector have been held
up by an armored battle northwest of Suez city. Israel is delaying efforts to establish stations on
the east bank; no observer patrols have reached
that area.
On the Syrian front, Damascus has pushed hard
to have observation teams installed along the Israeli bulge into Syrian territory, and the initial
UN plan is to have three posts on each side of the
salient. The new posts will be manned from those
previously closed and will not require additional
personnel.
(continued)
25 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 3
25X1
Approved For elease 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T00975A025500020002-5
Approved For R lease 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A025 00020002-5 25X1
25X1
Despite China's harsh description of the UN
cease-fire resolution as a ploy to bolster superpower
hegemony in the Middle East, the Chinese have not
tried to block either cease-fire call, undoubtedly
out of deference to Arab wishes. Throughout the
fighting the Chinese have kept a low profile, limiting themselves to strong verbal support for the Arabs
and pledges of additional economic aid to Egypt.
From the beginning the Chinese ruled out donating any
but token military assistance. Fully conscious of
its limited ability to influence events in the Middle
East, Peking has had to be content with positioning
itself to profit from any Arab dissatisfaction with
the policies of the superpowers, particularly the
USSR.
The US Embassy in Beirut has noted indecision
on the part of fedayeen spokesmen as to how to reconcile their public rejection of the cease-fire resolution with maintenance of good relations with
their Arab supporters who accepted it. Pro-fedayeen
press commentators are not directly attacking the
cease-fire, but are glorifying those who have-rejected it. In calling for a continuation of the
"struggle" rather than "war," the fedayeen may now
be moderating their position--or at least disguising
it--to guarantee continued support from Arab benefactors such as Egypt and Syria.
(continued)
25 Oct 7 3 Central Intelligence Bulletin 4
25X1
Approved For R lease 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T00975A025500020002-5
25X1 Approved For Release 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T00975A025500020002-5
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
Approved For Release 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A025500020002-5
Approved For telease 2004/07108 : CIA-RDP79T00975A 5500060001-2 25X1
ARAB STATES - ISRAEL: Except for a few scattered
exchanges near Suez city, which is still in Egyptian
hands, both the Egyptian and Syrian fronts were relatively calm again yesterday.
The Israelis claim to have shot down two Egyptian
,helicopters over the Gulf of Suez as they attempted to
reach the Third Army at dawn; a third helicopter apparently made it through. A UN convoy of 24 trucks passed
through Israeli lines and reached besieged Egyptian
units in SuE. '-n+ n- ann mid-9ay. The Syrian front
was quiet. 25X1 25X1
Radio Jerusalem announced that Israeli and.Egyptian officers would meet again today mainly to discuss
an exchange of POWs. The public mood in Israel reportedly has begun to harden on the POW issue. The
government has been stung by opposition critics in
the Knesset who have accused it of giving in to US
pressure to permit relief of the 'Egyptian Third Army
while obtaining nothing in return. Several influential
Israeli contacts have told US officials in Tel Aviv that
the Israeli Government will not agree to anything else
until the US persuades Cairo and Moscow to make some
tangible concessions on the POWs. Tel Aviv also wants
the alleged Arab blockade of the Straits of Bab el
Mandeb at the southern tip of the Gulf of 'Suez lifted,
according to these sources.;
Syrian President Asad told his nation yesterday
that the cease-fire had taken him by surprise, but
that he had agreed to accept it after the Soviets and
President Sadat gave him guarantees that Israel would
withdraw completely from all occupied Arab territory.
Asad acclaimed the cease-fire as a victory for the
Arab side, but threatened to renew the fighting if
Syria did not obtain its objectives by negotiations.
(continued)
30 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin
Approved For 4ease 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T00975A02 500060001-2 25X1
25X1 Approved For elease 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T0097 025500060001-2
Suez Canal Zone
8, Itim
Mediterranean Sea
7Im f' * enr \ ,.Port Said
Al Manziau
CAIMansur Ii
1 AMnsrN -' Rmpah r
*A Qantarah
(J )As Sahi,y t
SINAI
Az aq a zi g . Abu Suwayr
/ Egptia -- Bir
' ine Jifjafah 'Bi a Bjlbay'
iB y Deve soir Israeli
line ier
cnta n e ian -~ M tla
-Isral y~L 'a S att
f / P id
lin
0 Kr omreter1 20
a Statule mli 20
0 NeticaMiles 20
5548 10--/3 CIA 25X1
25X1 Approved For 7 Id G4i7G I~D7~h5A025500060001-2
Approved For Release 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T00975A0 5500060001-2 25X1
CThe Syrian President made several oblique references
to internal opposition, warning that a split in Syria's ranks would endanger the country's diplomatic
and military gains.
At the UN, Secretary General Waldheim is running
into difficulties assembling a 7,000-man international
force. The 585 peacekeeping troops now in the Middle
East have been drawn from the UN force on Cyprus and
are being paid out of the Cyprus peacekeeping fund.
Numerous states have offered troops, but most of them
have been rejected either because they belong to the
Warsaw Pact or NATO, or because they do not have diplomatic relations with Israel. Waldheim, therefore,
will have to organize a force made up of a patchquilt
of small states such as Panama, Finland, and Indonesia,
which will be a time-consuming job. One important
obstacle to funding the force was overcome last night
when the Soviet Union agreed to help pay for the operation as long as it is kept under tight Security
Council countrol. 25X1
25X1
30 Oct 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 2
Approved For elease 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A 25500060001-2 25X1
Approved For R ease - 5500110001-6 25X1
ARAB STATES - ISRAEL: General quiet prevailed
on he battlefront over the weekend, despite sporadic
cease-fire violations and continued preparations by
both sides for a possible resumption of hostilities.
Arab oil producers underscored their political war
with an additional production cutback.
The Syrian front was quiet, probably because
of heavy rains there, but occasional minor outbreaks
of fighting continued through the weekend along
the Suez Canal. The Israelis claim that on 3 November the surrounded Egyptian Third Army tried to
construct a small infantry bridge across the canal
from the east bank between Suez and Little Bitter
Lake. According to the Israelis, the bridging effort
was given up following a three-hour artillery, mortar, and small arms duel.
Yesterday, a UN patrol reported fighting near
Suez, as 200-300 Egyptian troops pushed out of the
city and were engaged by Israeli infantry and tank
units. UN observers also reported hearing heavy
explosions near Ismailia, and the Israelis complained that the Egyptians had opened fire on their
forces near the city.
25X1
Israeli spokesmen warned repeatedly that Egyptian actions could lead to a major breakdown in
the cease-fire. Defense Minister Dayan yesterday
accused Egyptian forces of mobilizing on the west
bank, and.Foreign Minister Eban--in an airport
statement before departing for a four-day visit to
Romania--warned that the cease-fire cannot be considered stable so long as freedom of navigation 's
not assured through the Strait of Bab al-Mandab.
(continued)
5 Nov 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 1
Approved For Nelease 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A0]5500110001-6 25X1
Approved For elease 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A0 5500110001-6 25X1
25X1
In a move probably designed to step up political pressure before the Secretary's visit, Arab oil
ministers announced a 25-percent production cutback
based on September's production figures. Saudi
Arabia, with the 10-percent limitation imposed in
mid-October and the additional embargoes of shipments to the US and the Netherlands, had already
reached the 25-percent level, and the new formulation appears to strengthen King Faysal's leadership
role. by committing the other producers to match his
cutback. The move may be designed to bring countries such as Libya, Algeria, and Iraq, which have
not been rigorously enforcing the earlier limitation, into line. If adhered to, it will increase
the overall Arab cutback in November by some five
percent over that already in effect.
At the UN, various delays. threaten to slow deployment of the full 7,000-man UN Emergency Force
(UNEF). The Secretary-General must negotiate agreements with each of the seven participant states approved by the Security Council last Friday. Consultations on the financing, size, and conditions
5 Nov 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 2
25X1
Approved For R lease 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T00975A 25500110001-6
25X1 Approved Fjr Release 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T009 5A025500110001-6
Cof service for each of their contingents may be more
complicated than usual because of the number of developing states which have not taken part in earlier
peace-keeping operations.
The problem of how to pay for UNEF is also unresolved. The US Mission to the UN has found little
support for the proposal that costs of the operation
be apportioned among UN members according to the
regular scale of assessments. Less-developed states
are likely to support instead a Brazilian proposal
making developed countries, particularly permanent
Council members, responsible for 98 percent of the
costs. Since there is no available cash on hand in
the UN treasury, a delay in agreement on some system
of assessing funds for UNEF could stall the entire
operation.
* * * *
25X1
5 Nov 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin
25X1
Approve. For Release 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T00975A021500110001-6
25X1
Approved For Felease 2004/01/15: CIA-RDP79T009 5A025700020001-4
(ARAB STATES - ISRAEL: Egyptian and Israeli
representatives are to meet again today at Kilometer
101 to continue yesterday's 3 -hour discussion concerning a mutual pullback of forces. Neither country has officially commented on yesterday's session,
but Cairo's chief representative, General Gamasy,
told reporters afterward that each side presented
two alternative proposals for a pullback. He said
"some" differences between the two sides remain, but
noted: "We are still trying." Cairo domestic radio,
meanwhile, broadcast a report on the meeting, citing
UN General Siilasvuo's comment that the discussions
were "beneficial."
Apparently in anticipation of difficulties at
Thursday's military talks, Egypt had earlier:
-- publicly accused Israel of obstructing implementation of the six-point agreement, and forecast that Thursday's talks would be "decisive";
--publicized a four-hour meeting Wednesday between President Sadat and his highest military
advisers;
-taken foreign military attaches on .a .14-hour
tour of canal-front military positions in order
to show Egyptian preparedness.
Egypt nevertheless completed, along with Israel,
the exchange of prisoners, and its official spokesman
expressed hope that an Arab-Israeli peace conference
would begin "within the next few weeks."
Syria, while expressing through Foreign Minister
Khaddam its intention to attend a peace conference
"if it is convened in accordance with our concept,"
appeared to be improving its military positions facing
the Israelis. On 21 November UN observers reported
that the Syrian Army was bringing more troops into
an area northwest of Sasa. The observers said the
Syrians, who had previously been anxious to have UN
patrols along the cease-fire line west of Sasa, no
23 Nov 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 1
25 1
Approved For Release 2004/01/15 : CIA-RDP79T00975 025700020001-4 1*
Approved Fo Release 2004/01/15: CIA-RDP79T00975A 25700020001-4 25X1
I fClonger wished a patrol in an area about six miles
northwest of the town. The UN observers also noted
that the Syrian chief of staff "probably will not
permit continued mobile patrols"; such a restriction
would significantly reduce UN coverage of the Syrian
side of the cease-fire line, because all such patrols
along the Sasa salient are mobile.
25X1
2 X1
Asked on
21 November if he expects military action in view
of Israel's "obstinate" stand, Foreign Minister -
Khaddam, who visited Cairo last weekend, said only
that Syria's battle with Israel embraces military,
political, and economic means, which complement
each other. Syrian President Asad is to make a oneday visit to Cairo today to-meet with President
Sadat. According to Egyptian press reports, Asad
will then fly to Algiers to attend the Arab summit
conference to begin on 26 .November.
Both.Syria and Egypt appeared confident that
Cairo's position on how to deal with current issues
would prevail at the Algiers conference. Iraq and
Libya are the only countries not attending, and the
possibility of lower level Libyan representation remains open. Egypt's semiofficial Al Ahram called
on all Arab states to attend the conference, stressing the need to maintain solidarity and preserve the
new Arab image achieved as a result of the October
war.
(continued)
23 Nov 73 Central intelligence Bulletin 2
Approved For lelease 2004/01/15: CIA-Rnp79Tnnn75An5 nnn2nnna 25X1
Approved For Release 2004/01/15: CIA-RDP79T00975 O25700020001-4 25X1
Meanwhile, the Organization of African Unity
meeting in Addis Ababa adopted a resolution simultaneously hailing Egypt's "October war of liberation"
and condemning Israel for its "act of aggression on
6 October." The resolution called on Israel to with- -
draw from.all occupied Arab territories and urged
that African states continue to withhold diplomatic
relations from Tel Aviv until it does so.
The first Israeli test of the Bab al-Mandab 25X1
blockade appears likely to occur around 6 December,
when the Israeli-chartered tanker Stonehaven should
arrive in the area on its way to Eilat with Iranian
rude oil. 25X1
2 3 Nov 7 3 Central Intelligence Bulletin 3
Approved For Ielease 2004/01/15 : CIA-RDP79T00975A0257 0020001 -4 5
lease 2004/07/07: CIA-RDP79B01709A0140005000 5 -
8
25XIA 30 November 1973
NOTE FOR THE RECORD:
SUBJECT 30 November Interagency Review of
Middle East Photo Reconnaissance Planning
1. A meeting of interagency representatives was called by the
National Intelligence Officer (NIO) for the Middle East on 30 November to
effect final review and coordination for a GIANT REACH mission authorized
to be flown during the coming week (2-8 December). iZ i (NIO)
was unable to attend because of last minute developments and he asked
that the meeting be chaired by Chairman, COMIREX--which was done. 25X1A
2. The following points were conveyed to the representatives:
a. On 29 November Dr. Kissinger approved the 21 November
73 memorandum containing a recommended plan for Middle East
Photo Reconnaissance which had been prepared under the DCI's
auspices. While the plan was approved as a package, it was understood that the' specific schedule (paragraph 12.a.) was approved in
principle subject to a check and approval before each individual
flight.
b. A specific GIANT REACH mission was approved for the
coming week (2-8 December).
c . Dr. Kissinger also indicated that the mechanism for
coordinating and reviewing the need for future SR-71 flights in
this package was to be handled through the NIO for the Middle East.
25X1 C 3. A late development which affected the content and focus of this
meeting was the fact that information had just been received via 25X1 C
ad received information that the war will be
25X1
25X1A
NRO, USAF and DIA review(s) completed.
Approved For Release 20 7 -RDP79B017 9A001400050005-8
TCP -- EGR-E-T
Approved For Release 2004/07/07: CIA-RDP79B01709A001400050005-8
25X1A 30 November 1973
resumed within a few days 23X
25X1 This new information, in turn, raised the urgency of having a
GIANT REACH mission as soon as feasible, rather than later in the week
25X1 C ahead. Iinformation is being checked out by all means available.
4. Conclusions of the meeting were as follows:
a. The earliest date on which a GIANT REACH mission can
be flown is Sunday, 2 December. This date was set as the objective,
subject only to the presence of adequate weather conditions in the
target areas. There was agreement that 50/50 weather would be used
as the general criterion and that close pre-mission coordination
between SAC and Washington DoD elements would be affected to make
a decision if weather conditions were below this threshold. 25X1 D
c. Representatives continued to meet to select the specific
objectives for the tech objective camera (TEOC) and to specify the
the coordinates to be used in adjusting the outbound flight path as
above.
5. I communicated. the foregoing to who concurred 25X1 A
and will advise the Director.
25X1A 25X1A
25X1
2
AOP- ECRE.T
Approved For Release 2004/07/07 :CIA-RDP79B01709A001400050005-8
Approved For Release 2004/07107: CIA-RDP79B01709A001400050005-8
MEMORANDUM FOR: NIO/ME
Sam.
This is the memo I prepared on the
Friday' meeting.
R.S.I.
FORM NO 101 REPLACES FORM 10-101 -4-
1 AUG 54 HICH MAY BE USED
Approved For Release 2004/07/07: CIA-RDP79B01709A001400050005-8
Approved For Release 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A025700090001-7
25X1
(ARAB STATES - ISRAEL: Efforts to persuade Cairo
and Tel Aviv .to resume direct talks continued yesterday amid indications of increasing expectations on
both sides that a resumption of the fighting may be -
imminent.
United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) commander
General Siilasvuo met with Egyptian Minister of War
- Ismail in Cairo for an hour yesterday before flying
to Jerusalem for meetings on Sunday with Israeli officials, probably including Minister of Defense Dayan,
according to.press reports. Cairo's UN representative met with UN Secretary General Waldheim yesterday and reportedly warned him that the breakdown of
the Kilometer 101 talks last Thursday could jeopardize the start of peace talks in Geneva on 18 December.
The representative also raised the possibility of
renewed fighting along the Suez front. Waldheim also
met with US, Soviet, and Israeli UN representatives
late yesterday. What, if any, success UN efforts to
bring the two sides together again might have is unclear, but press reports cite Egyptian officials as
saying it is now up to Washington and Moscow to salvage the situation by persuading Israel to be more
forthcoming on the issue of troop withdrawals in the
Sinai.
25X1
.4_
1 Dec 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 1
25X1
Approved For Release 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A025700090001-7
Approved For 2004007008 CIA-RDP79100 0ease 9
75AO25 7UT0001- 7 25X1
25X1
UN forces patrolling the southern Suez front
have reported a marked upswing in the number of
cease-fire violations over the past several days,
according to a UN spokesman in Cairo. An Israeli
military officer also told the press that the Suez
front was "warming up," and Tel Aviv reported that
Israeli forces came under Egyptian fire five times
yesterday, resulting in one Israeli wounded. Most
clashes, however, appeared to be localized affairs
involving small-arms fire, although some mortar and
artillery fire was also exchanged.
In a speech to American Jewish leaders in
Jerusalem, Prime Minister Meir repeated a number of
her well-known views on the Arab-Israeli question,
including her objections to international guarantees
as a substitute for defensible borders. She said
that she is not convinced that fighting will not be
resumed, although she hopes it will not. After
stating that she had not perceived a single genuine
call for peace comming from this week's Arab summit
in Algiers, she indicated that Israel is nonetheless
ready to take part in the proposed Geneva peace conference.
The Israeli scenario for the conference was
spelled out by Foreign Minister Eban in an interview
with an Israeli newspaper. He expects it to convene
in Geneva on schedule on 18 December, with Gromyko
and Kissinger attending the opening session along with the foreign ministers of Israel, Jordan, Syria,
Egypt, and possibly Lebanon. The conference would
then adjourn until after the Israeli Government received a negotiating mandate in the 31 December
elections. Eban said that he expected the peace
conference to go on for months after reconvening
in January, with this second phase attended by permanent delegations of professional diplomats who
1 Dec 73. Central Intelligence Bulletin 2
25X1
Approved For Release 2004/07/08 : CIA-RDP79T00975A025700090001-7
Approv d For Release 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A02570 090001-7 25X1
Cwould deal with specific problems between Israel
and individual Arab states as well as conduct discussions among the Arabs themselves.
Eban insisted that Israel would not accept the
participation in the peace conference of PLO leader
Yasir Arafat, even though the Arab summit had recognized the PLO as the sole representative of the Palestinian people. Instead, he suggested that Palestinian representatives be included in the Jordanian
delegation--the very concept that was rejected by
the Arab summit.
The US consul in Jerusalem reported on 30 November that Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied
1 West Bank are rapidly coming around to the view that
at the peace conference the PLO should negotiate for
all Palestinians. They reportedly also feel that an
independent West Bank - Gaza state should emerge
with PLO leadership, and that Jordan's King Husayn
should not be the Palestinians' negotiator or ruler.
Informed journalists think that, in the wake of the
Algiers summit, an overwhelming majority of the
normally politically fragmented West Bankers favor
these ideas, while the remainder are reluctant to
speak out in opposition.
In such an atmosphere, there is considerable
expectation that the PLO will try to broaden its
base by adding West Bank personalities to its Palestinian National Assembly. The upsurge of expressed
support for the PLO and a separate state apparently
has been stimulated by the widespread assumption
that now, for the first time, it is worthwhile for
the West Bankers themselves to decide what they
want, regardless
25X1
1 Dec 73 Central Intelligence Bulletin 3
I 25X1
Approved For Release 2004/07/08: CIA-RDP79T00975A0257000900 0 1-7
Approved For Rele se 2003/10/15: CIA-RDP79T00975A0 5900020001-2 25X 1
ARAB STATES - ISRAEL: Syria's announcement
yesterday that it would not participate in the
Geneva conference which begins Friday reflected the
ingrained convictions of important elements in
Syria that productive negotiations with Israel are
still not possible.
By casting doubt that Arab objectives can be
realized early through negotiation, the announcement heightened the ces o renewed hostilities
on the Golan front, 25X1
25X1 25X1
the
possibility exists that Egypt and Syria mig t advance their timetable for putting direct military
pressure on Israel to hasten its withdrawal from
Arab territory.
Egypt's reaction to the announcement, however,
held out the hope that the Syrians could be persuaded to come to Geneva later, if sufficient progress could be made to dispel their doubts. In an
official statement, Cairo expressed an understanding of the "fear and suspicion that have forced"
Syria not to attend the conference. The statement,
nevertheless, emphasized that significant progress
during the initial meetings in Geneva could open
the way for Syria and other Arabs to contribute
positively to the peace effort. The message warned,
however, that procrastination and stalling by the
Israelis would force the Arabs to resume their
armed struggle.
According to press reports from Geneva, Israeli
officials reaffirmed Israel's agreement to attend
the conference, despite Syria's decision to stay
away.
25X1
Dec 19, 1973 Central Intelligence Bulletin 2
25X1 Approved Fo[ Release 2003/10/15 : CIA-RDP79T00975A02 900020001-2
Approved For Re ease 2003/10/15: CIA-RDP79T00975A025900 20001-2
25X1
Despite Egyptian nervousness, there were few
cease-fire violations noted yesterday. UN observers
reported antiaircraft firing near Fayid on the west
bank of the Great Bitter Lake. Several heavy explosions were heard north of Suez City. According to
Jerusalem Domestic Service, there were no incidents
of cease-fire ,violations on the Syrian front. 25X1
Dec 19, 1973 Central Intelligence Bulletin 3
25X1
Approved For 4 lease 2003/10/15: CIA-RDP79T00975A02590002001-2
A Difficult Relationship
Intelligence Support for Richard M. Nixon (U)
John Helgerson
Editor's Note: This article is drawn and DC Helms. The President we]-
from "Getting To Know the Presi- cored the Republican candidates
dent: CIA Briefings of Presidential with a tour of his ranch in an open
Candidates, 1952-1992, "which has convertible, but, when the time came
been published by CIA's Center for the for the substantive briefing, he made
Study of Intelligence. only a few introductory remarks and
then gave the floor to the CIA
During his eight years as Vice Presi- Director.
dent in the 1950s, Richard Nixon
had broad exposure to the activities Helms's memorandum for the record
of the civilian US Intelligence Cor- indicates that he focused on the
Nixon's familiarity with munity. He was aware that the CIA handful of international develophad briefed the presidential candi- ments that were at a critical stage the Intelligence dates in every election since 1952 during the late summer of 1968,
Community's and undoubtedly harbored mixed including the confrontation between capabilitiesis t e a e pres abo e the ces Czechoslovakia and the Soviet
and practices made him had worked in 1960. Nixon believed Union, events in the Middle East,
willing, at the outset of his that his narrow defeat by John and the military situation in VietKennedy had been caused, in part, nam. The Director also discussed
new campaign for the by the actions and inactions of the Cuba, including Castro's support for
presidenc in 1968, to intelligence agencies. This familiarity revolutionary efforts in Latin Amer- with the Intelligence Community's ica, and events in the Dominican
accept briefings from CIA capabilities and practices made him Republic and Haiti. Following
Director Richard Helms. willing, at the outset of his new cam- Helms's briefing, Vance continued
paign for the presidency in 1968, to with a review of developments in the
accept briefings from CIA Director Paris peace negotiations that
SRichard Helms. It also led him to included details of the private talks
decline to receive routine briefings under way between the United States
from lower-level officers, opening and North Vietnam.
the way for Henry Kissinger, his
National Security Adviser, to play a Helms recorded that Nixon and
central and expanding role. Agnew were interested, in particular,
in the effects of the Soviet-CzechosloNixon won the Republican Parry yak confrontation on Poland and
nomination on 8 August 1968. Two Yugoslavia. He also noted that they
days later the nominee and his run- were surprised to hear that the North
ning mate, Governor Spiro Agnew of Vietnamese were demanding that the
Maryland, flew to Texas to hear a Saigon government negotiate directly "general review of the international with the Communist shadow adminsituation" from outgoing President istration in South Vietnam, the
Lyndon Johnson and his key foreign National Liberation Front. During policy advisers. In addition to the the course of the briefing, Nixon
President, the group included Secre- directed a number of policy quesary of State Dean Rusk, Cyrus tions to Rusk. The Republican John Helgerson is a former Deputy Vance (the number-two negotiator candidate made clear he had no
Director for Intelligence, in the Vietnam peace talks in Paris), intention of saying or doing
103
Nixon
Helms was aided in his
determination to avoid any
anything that would complicate theof anyhin wuldcomlicte tht he intelligence in 1968 by the dent and an impromptu afternoon of
job of the United States negotiators
in Paris. fact that there were no his foreign affairs aides. In addition
Loigbconhsfrtbifnof presidential debates that to the President, Rusk, and Helms,
Looking back on his first briefing ofSecrecandidate Nixon 25 years after the year. tary of Defense Clark Clifford,
fact, Helms recalled that, in his view, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
it was not a particularly well orga- " Gen. Earl Wheeler, and National
nized or useful session. 2 After his Security Adviser Walt Rostow.
own 15-minute overview of key Helms remembers that the afternoon
worldwide developments, he
recalled, the politicians' i n 1968-no effort by anyone to make meeting in the Cabinet room suf- tookaoerf the alcance ofstdis- a political issue of the Intelligence fered from the short notice and took over for the balance of the dis-lack of preparation. There
cussion in the sitting room at the A key factor that helped enseo
LBJ ranch and during the one-hour did not happen was Helms's strict substantive issues, inasmuch as
lunch that followed. Johnson was on constructionist view of the CIA "nobody knew what was wanted or
a liquid diet, recovering from a bout Director's job. He was determined to expected."
of diverticulitis, so he was free to do stick to the facts and avoid involveall the talking while the others ment in policy discussions, unlike his Invigorated by his election and vacaenjoyed a meal of steak and corn on predecessors Allen Dulles and John tion, the President-elect was struck
the cob. Helms recalled with some McCone. by the very different mood of the
amusement that the President of five other participants as they concenyears and the candidate, with his trated on Vietnam.' He recalled that
eight years of vice-presidential experi- Helms was aided in his determina- those assembled seemed very nearly
ence, each wanted to demonstrate to tion to avoid any politicization of worn out from dealing with the prothe other his mastery of foreign intelligence in 1968 by the fact that longed crisis and "had no new
affairs. there were no presidential debates approaches to recommend to me."
that year. Although there had been Nixon said he saw the war etched on
Nixon appears to have been pleased one debate during the primaries the faces around him and found
with the session; he later wrote posi- (between Robert Kennedy and them relieved to be able to turn the
tively in his memoirs about the "full- Eugene McCarthy), once the nomi- morass over to someone else. He
scale intelligence briefings ordered by nations were final Nixon concluded recorded that they emphasized to
Johnson for each of the nominees." 3 that he could avoid debating his him that the United States must see
The session concluded with the Presi- opponent, Vice President Hubert the war through to a successful condent's assurance to Nixon that he Humphrey, just as Johnson had clusion and that a negotiated
could call on Rusk or Helms for any declined to debate Goldwater in settlement that looked like a defeat
additional information he might 1964. Nixon's judgment was but- would have a devastating impact on require. tressed by the results of polls US allies and friends in Asia and
showing, as early as the first week in around the world.
As it happened, the discussion in September, that he was leading HumTexas on 10 August was the only phrey by a substantial margin, which From Helms's point of view, the
briefing Nixon was to receive in the he was able to retain throughout the meeting on 11 November was signifipre-election period. That session had campaign. cant for a reason unrelated to the
focused entirely on the facts of devel- discussion of Vietnam. Helms
opments abroad and the status of After a postelection vacation in Key remembers that Johnson asked him
negotiations in which the United Biscayne, Florida, President-elect to stay on for a private talk after the
States was involved. Unlike the situa- Nixon and his wife returned to New session adjourned. At that time,
tion that had developed in 1960, York City on Monday, 11 Novem- Johnson told Helms that Nixon had
there was in the August briefing- her, stopping en route in twice asked about him (Helms). and in the whole campaign in Washington for lunch with the Presi- Johnson said he told Nixon that he
104
Nixon
"had no idea how Helms had voted, Director for Intelligence. As a first Paul Corscadden, an 11-year veteran
but that his was a merit step, he asked Smith to confer with of the Agency's Office of Current
appointment." Nixon's chief aide, former adverts- Intelligence, was designated officer
ing executive Robert Haldeman. in charge. Kenneth Rosen, an intelliJohnson's kindness in recommend- gence officer who had served in the
ing Helms to the Nixon White House Situation Room under
administration may have resulted Joined by Howard Osborn, CIA's President Johnson and worked a year
from a lingering embarrassment over Director of Security, and Richard as a special assistant to McGeorge
the way he had treated Helms at an Lehman, Deputy Chief of the Office Bundy, was second in command.
earlier point. In 1965, Johnson had of Current Intelligence, Smith went Corscadden and Rosen moved into
passed over Helms to appoint to New York on the morning of 12 the Statler-Hilton Hotel at 7th AyeVAdm. William Raborn, Jr., as DCI. November.6 Smith showed Halde- nue and 33rd Street for the duration
At the time, Johnson informed man a sample of the intelligence of the transition period. Because of
Helms that, although he had heard publications the Agency proposed to the expense of living in New York
good things about him, "you are not make available to Nixon-The Presi- and the representational nature of
well enough known in this town," dent's Daily Brief (PDB), the Central the assignment, the Executive Direcmeaning Capitol Hill. But Johnson Intelligence Bulletin (CIB), the daily tor of CIA waived the standard per
went on to tell Helms that he Situation in Vietnam, the Weekly diem limitation and allowed each of
"should attend every meeting Review, and selected memorandums, them up to $30 per day.
Raborn did." In turn, Haldeman asked that the
Agency initiate special intelligence The area selected to house the
The Director's only other meeting security clearances for a number of Agency's facility required extensive
with Nixon during the transition staff members, including Richard renovation, which, magically, was
period occurred later the same week Allen and Martin Anderson. They accomplished by CIA's Office of
when he was summoned to New had been the President-elect's advis- Logistics in 72 hours, including one
York City on Friday, 15 November. ers on foreign affairs during the weekend. The construction activity
Helms entered the Nixon suite on campaign and were to continue to did not go unnoticed by other occuthe 39th floor of the Pierre Hotel at advise him during the transition pants of the building. Reports soon
1:30 p.m. to find the President-elect period, circulated that the Secret Service, the
conversing with adviser John Mitch- FBI, or some other sensitive, top
ell, who was to become Attorney
General. With virtually no prelimi- It was agreed that CIA should estab- s ovenent aen h
naries, Nixon indicated that he lish in a secure area a reading room things, a
would like Helms to stay on as DCI. Y to which members of the Nixon staff phyicalsecurity of all the PresidentThe public announcement would could come for security indoctrina- elect's staff offices and the protection
come some time later. tion and to read classified of his family. The CIA Office of
documents. Space was not available Security had decided not to identify, in the Pierre, so it was decided to the operation as Agency-sponsored
Supporting Nixon's Team in New locate the Agency's outpost, dubbed but, rather, to allow anyone who
York City5 "DDI-New York," in the basement learned of its existence to draw what- of the Nixon Campaign Headquar- ever conclusions they chose. This
Discussions between Johnson and ters at 450 Park Avenue, six blocks decision, reasonable on the face of
Helms resulted in a decision that from the office of the President-elect. things, led to unexpected conseCIA should make available to the This site, formerly the world head- quences. Before long, Nixon staff
President-elect in New York City the quarters of the North American secretaries were calling to ask that
same daily intelligence information Missionary Alliance and soon to be someone "behind the Black Door"
being provided to the outgoing Presi- demolished, was chosen because it investigate the disappearance of
dent in Washington. Helms assigned seemed unlikely to attract attention office supplies or solve the mystery
the task of providing this assistance from the press and the public. ofa purloined television set. On
to R. J. Smith, the Agency's Deputy Allen's office was also in the building. another occasion, the supervisor of
105
Nixon
the staff mailroom demanded that installed a safe in her office for the available in the facility and was told
one of the Agency communicators secure storage of classified materials, what had been delivered to the Pierre
"taste" and immediately remove Initially it was thought that she prob- for the President-elect since the
from the mailroom a crate of canned ably would return the publications Agency support operation began.
hams sent to the President-elect as a after two or three days, during which Kissinger was assured that the CIA
Christmas gift. time the President-elect would have was prepared to provide full support
had the opportunity to read at least a to him and the rest of the incoming
Those who were curious about what current issue of the PDB. administration.
was housed behind that Black Door
enjoyed the unwitting support of the For the first 10 days of the opera- During that first session, Kissinger
municipal health authorities. Occu- tion, only intelligence analyses expressed appreciation for the
pants of nearby buildings along Park prepared for the outgoing administra- Agency's willingness to assist him
Avenue had complained of an infesta- tion were made available to the and for the support it had so far protion of black rats that had established President-elect's staff. It soon vided the incoming administration.
colonies in the ground around the became apparent, however, that the He promised to arrange his schedule
brightly lighted Christmas trees fes- needs of the incoming administra- to allow 15 minutes per day to read
tooning the avenue from 59th Street tion did not coincide in every detail the intelligence publications. He also
to Grand Central Station. Within with those of the Johnson administra- accepted a proposal that Corscadden
hours, health inspectors poured tion. To meet the emerging special and Rosen undertake during off-duty
through all the nearby buildings. A needs of the new team, the Office of hours to advise him of any critical
team came to the door of the Agency Current Intelligence on 29 Novem- world developments requiring the
facility, demanding admission. They her compiled the first "Nixon attention of the President-elect. This were turned away with the assurance Special," an "Eyes Only" intelligence precautionary arrangement had earthat there were no rats inside. memorandum based upon sensitive ler been accepted by Allen and
intelligence information that the Anderson as well as Haldeman.
Beginning on 19 November, intelli- Agency knew would be of interest to
gence publications were wired to Nixon. The Foreign Broadcast Infor- Kissinger asked for time to become
New York on a daily basis. The Situa- mation Service soon afterward familiar with Nixon's reading habits
tion in Vietnam report arrived the provided an additional service by and daily routine before advising the
evening of its publication in Wash- transmitting directly to New York Agency of any recommendations he
ington; the PDB came soon after from its field bureaus foreign press might have for changes. He did say5:00 a.m. each morning. Nixon staff and radio articles pertaining to the in what foreshadowed Nixon's style
members who had access to the intel- incoming administration, and his own, in the White Houseligence publications came to the that it had been made clear to him
facility at their convenience. A read- that the President-elect had no intening table contained all of each day's The Key Player: Henry Kissinger tion of reading anything that had not
publications, along with appropriate first been perused and perhaps sumNational Intelligence Estimates, spe- The appointment of Harvard Profes- marized by one of his senior staff.
cial memorandums, intelligence sor Henry Kissinger as Assistant for Kissinger said he did not know what
handbooks, and various graphic aids. National Security Affairs was had happened to issues of the PDB
Of the key staffers, Allen and Ander- announced by the President-elect at already entrusted to Rose Mary
son visited most often. a news conference on 2 December. Woods but that, without his prior
By prior arrangement with DDI approval, future deliveries would not
Corscadden and Rosen delivered Smith, who had telephoned him reach the President-elect. Two days
each day a complete set of publica- from Washington the morning of later, Kissinger underscored that the
tions in a sealed envelope marked Nixon's announcement, Kissinger Agency should not provide intelli-
"Eyes Only-The President-elect" to came to the Agency facility on Park gence support to anyone at the Pierre
Rose Mary Woods in Nixon's office. Avenue for a briefing that same after- other than the President-elect and
Woods had been granted the proper noon.7 He was shown current issues himself; Mr. Haldeman and others
clearances, and the Agency had of all the intelligence publications from the campaign might have access
106
Nixon
Kissinger complained that
the prose in the PDB was
too often elliptical and that
to classified publications after they the selection of topics was by the Agency. Eagleburger's assignhad arrived in Washington, but they ment was to redraft CIA's
would have no need for them before too random and lacked the contribution. After scanning the
that time. tha tie.continuity necessary for the briefing book and posing one or two
questions about de Gaulle's nuclear
Kissinger reacted none too favorably uninitiated reader. program, Kissinger asked for still
to the first few issues of the PDB more material on Berlin, the probthat he read. At one time, he 7 lem of Nigeria's breakaway state of
expressed a preference for the CIB Biafra, the strategic arms balance,
with its more complete text and NATO, the Russian intervention in
greater detail. He complained that Johnson was significantly more con- Czechoslovakia, and the prospects
the prose in the PDB was too often cise than that given Nixon. for a meeting in Warsaw of Chinese
elliptical and that the selection of and American representatives. Kisstopics was too random and lacked To no one's surprise, it proved re lte o eainburr
the continuity necessary for the..repniliyfrrpangdats
uninitiated reader. Kissinger's points issibe o schedule briefings with for his consideration the next
were well taken. The PDB was ssinger on adaily basis; he was evening in Washington, when the
uniquely tailored to the needs of the seen frequently but unpredictably. President-elect proposed to unveil
outgoing administration-just as its His assistant, Lawrence Eagleburger his Cabinet during a nationwide telepredecessor had been shaped to the of the Department of State, was seen vision broadcast from the Shoreham
reading preferences of President evety day and was notably more Hotel in Washington. Eagleburger
Kennedy. Moreover, its authors appreciative of the assistance he was worked in the basement at Park Ayecould assume that President Johnson provided. nue until 3:00 a.m., returned to the
and his advisers were familiar with Pierre for a brief rest, and then
the background of the subjects cov- On 9 December, Kissinger told Cor- assumed the job of redrafting and
ered each day. Nixon and Kissinger, scadden that he had been asked to editing the briefing Kissinger was to
however deep their background and brief the President-elect's "senior give.
however well read, lacked detailed staff" and would need inputs for a
familiarity with many of the ongo- 30-minute session on the Soviet Eagleburger's task was complicated
ing, current issues addressed in the intervention in Czechoslovakia, the by the fact that, except for Woods,
PDB. state of US-Chinese relations, the none of the Nixon clerical staff,
US-USSR strategic arms balance, including Kissinger's secretary, had
This situation had been anticipated and the Arab-Israeli conflict. He yet been granted special intelligence
by the Agency, because it had come asked especially for tidbits, local security clearances. Corscadden
up in all prior transitions. The color ... things which will make arranged to have Eagleburger's preOffice of Current Intelligence had these people think they're getting the liminaty text typed by the Agency
already begun to devise a new ver- inside story but which, if leaked, will secretaty assigned to DDI-NY and
sion of the PDB for Nixon and his not compromise or embarrass me or to have it taken to the Pierre. Eagleaides. Considerably expanded in the President-elect or the United burger was then driven to LaGuardia
length, the new brief had been circu- States Government." He promised to Airport for his flight to Washington.
lated for comment to the DCI, DDI, come to Park Avenue soon to review CIA officers met Eagleburger at
and others of the Agency's principal the drafts. National Airport and took him to an
officers. With their concurrence, it improvised two-room office at the was decided to send the new PDB to On the afternoon of 11 December, Shoreham Hotel. They remained
New York. Kissinger approved its for- Kissinger paid his second visit to the with Eagleburger for much of the
mat and style at a meeting on the basement suite on Park Avenue, arriv- night of 12 December, calling on the
evening of 6 December. Thus, the ing with Eagleburger. It was evident Agency's analytic resources to proAgency began to publish, in effect, that the two had discussed the for- vide substantive backup through the
two PDBs. The substance was the mat Kissinger preferred even before Duty Officer in the Operations
same, but the publication given to he had seen the materials prepared Center.
107
Nixon
During his late-evening television administration was likely to face dur- result of a PDB item on coup reports
appearance, the President-elect dis- ing its first few months in office- in a certain country. Kissinger asked
closed that he and his Cabinet-to-be "stressing the significance, not the about US contingency plans if a
and top advisers would spend the fol- facts"-and to discussion of what- coup occurred. When the Agency
lowing day, Friday, 13 December, in ever papers Kissinger had requested officers replied that they were not
conference. One of the highlights of of the Agency. He directed that normally privy to such contingency
their all-day session would be an memorandums prepared for Nixon planning, Kissinger turned to Eagleintelligence briefing by Kissinger. should contain a "statement of the burger and insisted that a
Agency officers received no direct problem and an assessment of its sig- representative of the Department of
feedback on the substantive discus- nificance," as well as a summary. State attend the morning briefing sessions held on 13 December. They sions. Eagleburger discussed the idea
were interested that Kissinger, in Kissinger's reading of an estimate on with CIA, but nothing came of it.
their next meeting, directed that Soviet strategic attack forces led him Years later, describing how the sysAttorney General-designate Mitchell to ask for an oral briefing on the US- tem worked, Eagleburger recalled
receive the PDB and all other reports Soviet strategic balance. After con- that he "occasionally called on the
in which he expressed any interest. suiting with his military aide, Gen. State Department to send specific
Before long, Mitchell was being Andrew Goodpaster, and with Eagle- written materials-I was from State,
briefed on a daily basis and proved to burger, Kissinger decided that the after all-but the Agency team was
be "very helpful as a window into J-3 section of the Joint Chiefs should all we needed right there."10
what Nixon wanted." take the lead. CIA's Deputy Director
for Science and Technology and As Kissinger became more and more
In mid-December, Kissinger also Director of Strategic Research were active toward the end of December,
directed that no National Intelli- also invited to participate in the brief- his probing questions and his insatiagence Estimates were to go to the ing, which was held on Saturday, ble demands for assessments of the
President-elect. Somewhat sharply, 21 December. In addition to Kiss- significance of isolated develophe explained that no one department inger, Mitchell, Eagleburger, and ments-even those in the low order
or agency of the government would Goodpaster were present. of probability-meant that far more
be permitted to present its views speculative, estimative analysis was
directly to Nixon to the disadvantage This was the most formal briefing required. This led CIA to the stratof any other. Corscadden pointed Kissinger received during the transi- egy of having its substantive officers
out that a National Intelligence Esti- tion; unfortunately, it did not go prepare detailed backup pieces to
mate was the product of the well. The J-3 team that had traveled complement the topics covered each
Intelligence Community as a whole, from Washington to conduct the day in the PDB. These reports prothat it was issued in the name of the briefing used only the "high side" vided the generalists who briefed
United States Intelligence Board, numbers regarding Soviet capabilities Kissinger with additional informaand could not be considered "paro- in preparing their text and graphics. tion with which to field his queries.
chial." This rejoinder had no This prompted the CIA experts
appreciable effect. present to try to supplement the Mindful of Kissinger's repeated
briefing and question some of its con- requests for "problem papers," speToward the end of December, Kiss- clusions. In the discussion that cial briefings on emergent crises
inger began to meet more regularly followed, Kissinger, Goodpaster, likely to confront the new adminiswith Corscadden and Rosen. By and, finally, Mitchell asked ever- tration during its first months in
then, Kissinger was able to read only more probing questions, to the obvi- office, and "must reading" before
the PDB with any regularity; DDI- ous chagrin of the briefers. Kissinger Inauguration Day, the Agency in late
NY was responsible for calling to his and Mitchell both made clear after December began appending to the
attention "critical items" in other the fact that they were not satisfied. PDB a series of special papers
publications. The balance of the 15- focused on critical issues. For more
minute "daily" session was devoted The issue of possible direct State than 18 months, the PDB, at Presito a capsule review of crucial interna- Department involvement in the sup- dent Johnson's request, had carried
tional situations the new port process in New York arose as a special annexes on Vietnam and on
108
Nixon
The support operation
mounted in New York
constituted the most
North Vietnamese reflections on the yet critical-could in time engage
US political scene. Kissinger decided elaborate system yet US policy interests. The annexes
that the annexes need not be sent to designed to provide were to fulfill the same role as the
the President-elect and should not be intelligence to a "problem papers" that were
published after Inauguration Day. appended to the PDB sent to New
The new "problem papers" were President-elect. York during the early part of Janudesigned in part, therefore, to replace ay. Kissinger approved the new the Vietnam annexes in the New77fomtn15Jua.
York edition of the PDB, which was
by now being tailored for the incoming administration. Kissinger proposed that the DCI Nixon Remains Aloof
change the publication time for the
In the remaining days of the opera- PDB from early morning to late
tion, Kissinger read the "problem Tespotoeainmutdi tio, Kssigerred te "robemafternoon, releasing the publication New York constituted the most elabpapers" on such subjects as access to to him in the evening and to the
Berlin, the Berin Communist omunsttropPresident te troop oaesse e eindt rvd the following morning, intelligence to a President-elect. Ironbuildup in South Vietnam, the mili- This change, Kissinger admitted,
j ~tary balance between the two Koreas, clyNio'aofstersuedn tarybalncebeteenthetwoKoras, would introduce a lag of 12 hours in asituation where the Agency had no and the French economic situation.a Fo and thee o jecm I tain. the reporting time, but he was not direct contact with him. Until midFor each of these subjects, CIA ana- dtb that the Pfwudb
lysts with the appropriate expertise less current; he was more concerned eceme for exampe Ae ofc
traveled to New York to accompany ta ehv iet rpr i w
the regular briefers. Especially in the cmt aytig n tepresiden been reading the PDB or the other
cases of Vt and Kra Kissoudse publications deposited each morning
inger had numerous questions. He with his secretary. On 18 December,
wanted to know the Agency's past Eagleburger confided that Nixon had
track record in estimates on the sub- With Inauguration Day less than a informed Kissinger that Woods had
ject at hand and pressed the analysts week away, the Agency proposed to been "stockpiling" the unopened
for "your personal opinions." introduce to the President-elect and envelopes containing the PDB, CIB,
Kissinger an entirely new PDB- and memorandums on Vietnam.
On 6 January, Kissinger, who ini- redesigned to meet Kissinger's specifi- Nixon had asked Kissinger to send
tially became Nixon's National cations fora briefing paper tailored someone upstairs to retrieve these
Security Adviser, turned to the ques- to Nixon's preferences. This new envelopes so that Kissinger could
tion of intelligence support on publication was to consist of three review the collection and decide
Inauguration Day and thereafter. By sections-Major Developments, whether there was anything in it that
this time, Nixon had expressed his Other Important Developments, and the President-elect should read. The
intention to hold regular staff meet- occasional annexes-all double- question had been answered: Mr.
ings with his key advisers at 9:00 spaced and printed on legal-size Nixon had read no Agency publicaa.m. or 9:30 a.m. each morning. Kiss- paper bound at the top. tions during the first month of the
inger surmised that he would brief New York operation.
the President for 30 minutes each The first section, Major Developmorning, immediately following ments, was to be subdivided into Eagleburger observes that Nixon's
these staff conferences. He did not sections on Vietnam, the Middle handling of the intelligence material
want to give Nixon anything he and East, Soviet Affairs, and Europe. was a result of his management style
his National Security Council staff This was not a static listing. As devel- rather than any disinterest in foreign
had not had time to mull over and opments warranted, some areas developments. In fact, he says,
was anxious to "preview" intelligence could be dropped, others added. The "Nixon was very interested-but it
reporting each evening, with an eye second section, Other Important was just him and Henry. That's why
to meeting the Chief Executive early Developments, was intended to high- you didn't brief him directly." Eagle- the next day. light problems which-though not burger did not see Nixon either109
Nixon
briefings of the President-elect were Nixon himself. For the most part, ings could be, especially during the
the prerogative of Kissinger alone. however, it did not matter. CIA took early period of the Nixon presidency:
pride in serving those who clearly
Other accounts, however, confirm would be the key foreign policy aides From the very beginning of the
more directly that Nixon's refusal to to the new president.
receive intelligence briefings person- w a itiinaen eimts
ally stemmed alystmedfomngaie from negative attitudeswacrtiznAgcyeimes titds On one occasion the ambiguity estimates done back when he was about the CIA that went well beyond , about who was really speaking for
an aloof and formal management whom was especially worrisome. A abou esimen the ne
style. Goodpaster, who worked with few days before the inauguration,
the transition staff to help organize Kissinger called Helms in Washing- ing yearsldon't know. But he
the national security apparatus, would constantly, in National
remembers discussing with Nixon said that the CIA Director, followin Securiy Council meetings, pick
how the Eisenhower team had han- the inauguration, should brief the on the Agency for not having
died intelligence support. Goodpaster Godpstr says ay Nixon Nxo "acknowl- "ckow" National gence matters Security at Council on intelli- properly judged what the Soviets the opening of its were going to do with various
edged the importance of intelligence, meetings but should then leave the kinds of weaponry. And obvibut also commented that when you nede titote ws'tthr."' meetings before the poiydiscus- ously, he was being selective, but needed it, it often wasn't there."" olc
sions. This scenario was represented he would make remarks about
by Kissinger as Nixon's, but Helms this and say this obviously had to Discouraging as it was to CIA offic- knew it was a ridiculous idea. Long be sharpened up. The Agency
ers not to have personal contact with experience had shown him that poli- had to understand it was to do a
Nixon, a great deal of Agency mate- cymakers, during the course of their better job and so on. AndI
rial did reach the President-elect deliberations, frequently needed to haven't the slightest doubt that
through Kissinger's daily briefings. turn to the representative of the Intel- Nixon's carping affected According to Eagleburger, "Henry ligence Community for factual Kissinger, who after all was his
made heavy use of the CIA material. updates. l securiy
I remember especially Korea and
other Asian issues. Henry would go
in and go over the material with Two days following the inauguraNixon; documents would be left t the first NSC meeting was
behind that Nixon would read." held. At the outset, Nixon invited ms
Rosen remembers how pleased the the attendees to stay for lunch followAectemwas Aectemwsweitwuding the meeting. With this fact remains that if the things when it would lewr occasionally receive back from Kiss- encouragement, Helms stayed had not been read, fpeop
inger copies of the PDB initialed by through the meeting and lunch. And notpaying attention to them
Nixon, confirming that at least some with the precedent established, he there never would have been the
of the material was being read.'2 simply stayed throughout all subse- challenge. So Idon't think anyquent NSC meetings. The scenario body needs to feel bad abo ut a
Throughout the two months of the earlier raised by Kissinger never sur- rocky period in theAgency's hisoperation in New York, there was faced again, tory. It was bound to be a rocky
some uneasiness among Agency man- period with Richard Nixon as
agers because Kissinger levied heavy CIA's direct access to Nixon was lim- President, given the fact that he
demands for analytic work in the ited to the briefings by the Agency's held the Agency responsible for
President's name, and Eagleburger directors-Richard Helms, James his defeat in 1960. And he never
levied similarly heavy demands in Schlesinger, and, finally, William forgot that, and he hada barb
Kissinger's name. Without direct Colby-at meetings of the National out for the Agency all the time access to acest the h rncplcnueit cnueprincipal consumerdit Security Council. In an interview in because he really believedad was always unclear how much of this 1982, Helms offered a graphic think he believes to this day, that
material was really wanted or read by account of how difficult those meet- that "missilegap"question was
110
Nixon
Colby's initiative was to
afford CIA unprecedented
direct and daily access to
the responsibility of the Agency Whatever his mix of motives, Colby
and that it did him in.13 invited the Vice President to visit
moved into the Oval CIA Headquarters. Ford came, on
When he was elected President in Office. 12 June 1974, and was given wide1968, Nixon could hardly have imag- ranging briefings on intelligence
ined how the collection capabilities operations and assessments. In
of the US Intelligence Community 9 response to Ford's request, Colby
had improved since the end of his agreed to send him the PDB, in additerm as Vice President eight years tion to the National Intelligence Daily
before. At the time he had left that he had been receiving. An Agency
office, several years of U-2 flights tion Room, the Joint Chiefs, and current intelligence specialist, David
had given the United States an others. Nixon would keep the mate- Peterson, was assigned to provide
invaluable look at the Soviet Union. rial on his desk, reading it at his continuing intelligence support to
Butth figtsha ben ntrmttnt convenience throughout the day. the Vice President. But the flights had been intermittent Febc oteAec yial a
and covered only a portion of Soviet
territory. As a result, the United provided by Kissinger directly to the Ford accepted a suggestion that the
States in 1960 was still dealing in DCI. PDB be brought to him directly,
conjecture about possible deployed acknowledging that this would be
Soviet strategic systems, albeit the most secure way to receive the
informed conjecture. In 1968, it was A Closer Relationship With Ford sensitive document. He specified
dealing in facts. It was never clear that he would like to see it early each
that the cynical President appreci- In the late spring of 1974, when it morning, preferably as his first
ated what had changed. was becoming apparent that Nixon appointment. Beginning 1 July, that would not survive the Watergate became the regular routing, one that
scandal, the DCI saw a responsibility was altered only occasionally by such
As the years passed, the NSC forum and an opportunity." William diversions as a Vice Presidential
was less and less fruitful. Colby Colby, who had been appointed breakfast with the President or a remembers that "Nixon didn't oper- Director in September 1973, decided speaking engagement out of town.
ate well in meetings-he liked to that CIA should help the new Vice On a few occasions, Ford was seen at
make decisions on the basis of writ- President, Gerald Ford, prepare for his Alexandria home before he flew
ten material. When you did brief his likely elevation to the Presidency. off to keep such an engagement.
him on something, he looked like his Colby's initiative was to afford CIA Always a gracious host, he brewed
mind was on other things-he may unprecedented direct and daily and served instant coffee.
have been thinking about Watergate, access to the President when Ford
I guess."" Colby wrote in his mem- moved into the Oval Office. Ford came to the vice-presidency an
oirs that none of Nixon's three DCIs informed consumer of the products
saw him outside formal or ceremo- Colby modestly recounts that his of the Intelligence Community. He
nial meetings. "I remember only one- decision to provide full intelligence notes that he "had become familiar
private conversation with him; it
occurred when occrrd he wen phoned phoedto to ask skwith support good to preparation Ford "had as much to do with CIA first as a member of the in case some- Intelligence Subcommittee on Appro- what was happening in China, and I thing happened to the President- priations and later in other roles,
provided a quick summary off the
topof m head." 5 
to had"Nixon's o m any president-as problems with it did Watergate." with including Minority Leader. I knew Colby from my days in Congress."'8
Colby remembers his belief at the This familiarity, particularly with
Throughout the Nixon presidency, time that "we should get the PDB to Colby personally, was to provide the
the PDB was delivered by courier to the Vice President so that he would Agency at least a temporary buffer in
Kissinger's office. Kissinger each day know everything the President knew, some difficult times to come.
delivered to the President a package We didn't want another situation
of material that included the PDB like when Truman was unaware of When Nixon resigned and Ford was along with material from the State the Manhattan Project." sworn in as President on 9 August
111
Nixon
1974, Agency officers were uncertain 5. The material that follows regarding 1993. Unless otherwise noted, subsewhether the briefings would con- the Agency's activities in New York quent comments by Colby also come
tinue. It seemed probable that City draws very heavily on the classi- from this interview.
Kissinger would intervene and termi- fied writings of the late Paul H.
nat th sesinssubtiutig smeCorscadden; he is in effect the author 15. William Colby and Peter Forbach, ateof this section. Honorable Men: My Lif in the CIA
other arrangement. (He was
described later as "furious" when he (e ok io n cutr desriedlaeras"frius wenhe 6. They had planned to fly, but a heavy 1978), p. 373.
learned of the CIA briefing routine, snowfall intervened, and the three
of which he had not been informed.) men traveled by train instead, arriv- 16. The materialthat follows regarding
The uncertainty was short-lived; that ing at Pennsylvania Station in the the Agency's support of President
evening Ford passed the word that storm-struck metropolis at the onset Ford was in large part drafted by
he wanted his usual briefing the next of the evening rush hour. They were David A. Peterson.
morning at the White House. provided a police escort to take them through the badly snarled traffic to 17. In the election campaign of 1972,
the Central Park area and the Pierre there had been no special intelligence Hotel, briefings. Nixon, as the incumbent
NOTES president, continued to receive the
7. A more detailed discussion of PDB. His Democratic opponent,
1. Richard Helms, Memorandum for Smith's exchange with Kissinger can Senator George McGovern, at one
the Record, "Briefing of Former Vice be found in his memoirs, The point had agreed (against the counsel
President Nixon and Governor Unknown CIA. My Three Decades of his advisers) to receive an intelliAgnew," 12 August 1968. with the Agency (Washington; Perga- gence briefing from Kissinger. The
mon-Brassey's; 1980), pp. 20 1-203. CIA was to follow up with regular
2. Interview of Richard Helms by the briefings. Unfortunately, the politiauthor in Washington, DC, 16 8. The CIA officers involved in this cal cr g McGovern's
March 1993; Subsequent comments exercise were delighted later in the running matevSna
of Helms come also from this month when Kissinger sent Helms a Eagleton, forced the cancellation of
ineveletter of thanks for their extraordi- the Kissinger briefing, and it proved interviewnarefforts impossible to reschedule either that
3. Richard Nixon, The Memoirs of Rich- finore
ard Nixon (New York; Grosset and 9. Interview of Richard Lehman by the
Dunlap; 1978), p. 316. Nixon's author in McLean, Virginia, 18. Interview of Gerald Ford b the
Democratic opponent in 1968, 10 March 1993. ad
Hubert Humphrey, routinely 8 Septeer 993.
received intelligence reports by virtue 10. Telephone interview of Lawrence
of being the incumbent Vice Presi- Eagleburger by the author, 1 Novemdent. Two other candidates also her 1993. Other comments by
received intelligence briefings in that Eagleburger come also from this
unusual year: former Alabama Gover- interview.
nor George Wallace on 26 July; and
Georgia Governor Lester Maddox on 1 Telephone interview of Andrew
21 August. Helms and others briefed Goodpaster by the author, 17
each of these candidates in Rusk's
office, generally on the same array of
subjects they had covered with
Nixon. Very brief accounts of these 12. Interview of Kenneth Rosen by the
sessions can be found in Helms's author in McLean, Virginia,
Memorandums for the Record: 22 arch 1993.
"Briefing of Former Governor
George C. Wallace," 26 July 1968; 13. Interview of Richard Helms by R.
and "Briefing of Governor Lester Jack Smith, Washington, DC,
Maddox," 22 August 1968. 21 April 1982.
4. Nixon, The Memoirs of Richard 14. Interview of William Colby by the
Nixon, p. 336. author in Washington, DC, 7 April
112

